2016-2017 Course Catalog 



MERCYHURST UNIVERSITY 


A LIBERAL ARTS UNIVERSITY FOR MEN AND WOMEN 


501 EAST 38TH STREET • ERIE, PA 16546-0001 • 814-824-2000 • 800-825-1926 • MERCYHURST.EDU 

CATALOG 2016-2017 


Carpe Diem 




The catalog represents the most accurate information on Mercyhurst University available at the time of printing. The 
university reserves the right to make alterations in its programs, regulations, fees and other policies as warranted. 

Notice of Non-Discrimination 

Mercyhurst University values diversity and is committed to the goal of achieving 
equal opportunity for all. For that reason, Mercyhurst abides by federal, state and 
local law in admissions, employment and all services and programs provided. 

Mercyhurst does not unlawfully discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion, 
creed, sex, citizenship status, ancestry, national or ethnic origin, age, familial status, 
sexual orientation, physical or mental disability, military or veteran status or any 
other legally protected characteristic or because of any individual’s legally protected 
activities. 

Mercyhurst complies with federal, state and local legislation and regulations 
regarding nondiscrimination. This policy applies to faculty, administration and staff, 
applicants for employment, students and applicants for educational programs and 
activities. 

Mercyhurst University prohibits sexual harassment, including sexual violence. The 
following person has been designated to handle inquiries regarding the nondiscrimination 
policies and to serve as the overall campus coordinator for purposes 
of Title IX compliance: Alice Agnew, Title IX Coordinator, 300 Old Main, 814-8242362. 
The following individuals have been designated as deputy Title IX 
coordinators: for Athletics, Stacey Gaudette, Assistant Athletic Director, Baldwin 
Lower Level, 814-824-2079; for Student Life, Laura Zirkle, Vice President for 
Student Life, Egan 314, 814-824-2262; for Employees, Tina Fryling, Preston 122, 
814-824-2352; and for any community members of the branch campuses, including 
the Corry and North East campuses, Jackie Fink, 814-725-6399, Miller 120. Inquiries 
concerning the application of anti-discrimination laws may be referred to the Title 
IX coordinators or to the Office for Civil Rights, United States Department of 
Education. For further information on notice of nondiscrimination, visit 
http://wdcrobcolp01.ed.gov/CFAPPS/OCR/contactus.cfm for the address and phone 
number of the U.S. Department of Education office that serves your area, or call 1800-
421-3481. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS TABLE OF CONTENTS 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


ACADEMIC PROGRAMS. ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1 


ACADEMIC CALENDAR. ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2 


AN INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................................................................................................................3 


STUDENT LIFE.....................................................................................................................................................................................................6 
Cultural/Social/Spiritual 
Department of Experiential 
Learning Athletics 
Residence Life 

Student Health Program 

ACADEMIC AFFAIRS............................................................................................................................................................................................11 
Graduation Requirements 
Basic Competencies Requirements 

Core Curriculum Requirements 
Majors and Double Majors Academic 
Policies and Procedures 


Special Academic Programs and Services for Students with Disabilities 

ADMISSIONS. ............................................................................................................................................................................................................. 26 


OFFICE OF ADULT ENROLLMENT ............................................................................................................................................................ 29 


STUDENTFINANCIALSERVICES. ............................................................................................................................................................................. 32 
Tuition and Fees Financial Aid 
Scholarships 

ACADEMIC PROGRAMS. ......................................................................................................................................................................... 44 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS. ......................................................................................................................................................................... 155 
BOARD OF TRUSTEES......................................................................................................................................................................................241 
ADMINISTRATION...........................................................................................................................................................................................243 
FACULTY ...............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................245 
ASSOCIATIONOFMERCYUNIVERSITIES....................................................................................................................................................... 254 
INDEX........................................................................................................................................................................................................ 255 


2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


ACADEMIC PROGRAMS 1 ACADEMIC PROGRAMS 


ACADEMIC PROGRAMS 


MASTER OF SCIENCE 

Anthropology 
Forensic and Biological Anthropology 
Archaeology and Geoarchaeology 

Criminal Justice Administration 
Data Science 
Applied Intelligence 
Organizational Leadership 

Accounting Concentration 
Higher Education Administration Concentration 
Human Resources Concentration 
Non-Profit Management Concentration 
Sports Leadership Concentration 
Strategy & Innovation Concentration 

Physician Assistant 

Special Education 
Applied Behavior Analysis Concentration 
Autism Concentration 
English Language Learners Concentration 

Secondary Education: Pedagogy and Practice 

BACHELOR OF SCIENCE 

Anthropology/Archaeology 
Archaeology Concentration 
Bioarchaeology Concentration 

Applied Forensic Sciences 
Criminalistic/Forensic Biology Concentration 
Forensic Anthropology Concentration 
Forensic Chemistry Concentration 

Athletic Training 
Biochemistry 
Bioinformatics 
Biology 

Medical Technology Concentration 

Neuroscience Concentration 
Chemistry 
Environmental Science 

Biology Field Studies Concentration 

Geology Field Studies Concentration 
Exercise Science 
Fashion Merchandising 
Geology 
Health Care Management * 
Interior Architecture and Design 
Nursing* BSN 
Physics 
Public Health 
Sports Medicine 

Clinical Exercise Physiology Concentration 
Pre-Medical Concentration 
Pre-Physical Therapy Concentration 
Pre-Occupational Therapy 
Pre-Physician Assistant 

BACHELOR OF ARTS 

Accounting 

Anthropology/Archaeology 
Archaeology Concentration 
Sociocultural Anthropology Concentration 

Art Education 
Art Therapy 
Biology 

Medical Technology 
Neuroscience Concentration 


Business and Competitive Intelligence 
Business Economics 
Chemistry 

Sustainability Studies Concentration 
Communication 
Criminal Justice 

Corrections Concentration 
Criminology Concentration 
Juvenile Justice Concentration 
Law Enforcement Concentration 
Pre-Law Concentration 


Dance 

Pedagogy Concentration 
Early Childhood Education 
Early Childhood /Special Education 
English 

Creative Writing Concentration 
Pre-Law Concentration 
Secondary Education Concentration 
Writing Concentration 

Environmental Science 
Biology Field Studies Concentration 
Geology Field Studies Concentration 

Finance 
French 
French Education 
Geology 

Environmental Geology/Hydrology Concentration 

Geoarchaeology Concentration 
Graphic Design 
History 

Public History Concentration 
Social Studies Education Concentration 

Hospitality Management 
Food and Beverage Management Concentration 
Hotel Management Concentration 
Event Management Concentration 

Human Resource Management 
Information Technology 
Integrated Marketing Communication 
Intelligence Studies 
Interdisciplinary Studies 
International Business 
Liberal Studies 
Management 
Marketing 
Mathematics 
Music 
Philosophy 
Physics 
Political Science 

Applied Politics Concentration 
Environmental Studies and Politics Concentration 
International Relations Concentration 
Pre-Law Concentration 

Psychology 

Neuroscience Concentration 
Public Health 
Religious Studies 
Russian Studies 
Sociology 

Criminology Concentration 
Social Work 
Spanish 
Spanish Education 
Sport Business Management 
Studio Art 

BACHELOR OF FINE ARTS 

Dance 

BACHELOR OF MUSIC 

Composition 
Music Education 
Music Therapy 
Performance 

AFFILIATED PROGRAMS IN MEDICINE 

Lake Erie College of Osteopathic Medicine (LECOM) 

Medicine (3+4, 4+4) 
Pharmacy (2+3, 3+3, 4+1, 4+3) 
Dentistry (4+4) 


Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine 
(PCOM) 

Medicine (3+4) 

New York College of Chiropractic Medicine (NYCC) 

Chiropractic Medicine (3+3) 

KENT State University College of Podiatric Medicine 

Podiatry (3+4) 

SAINT VINCENT HEALTH CENTER 

Medical Terminology (3+1) 

TEACHER CERTIFICATION PROGRAMS 

Art (K-12) 
Early Childhood Education (PreK-4) 
Music (K-12) 
World Language – French, Spanish (K-12) 


ASSOCIATE OF ARTS 

Liberal Arts* 
Early Childhood Education* 


ASSOCIATE OF SCIENCE 

Business Administration 
Accounting Concentration*# 
Insurance Concentration # 
Management Concentration * 
New Media Concentration* 
Sport Management Concentration * 
Viticulture Concentration* 

Biology 
Computer Systems Support* 
Criminal Justice 

Law Enforcement Concentration* 
Hospitality Management 

Culinary Arts Concentration * 
Interior Design 
Medical Laboratory Technician* 
Nursing * 
Occupational Therapy Assistant* 
Physical Therapist Assistant * 
Respiratory Therapy Assistant* 

* Offered through North East location 
# Offered through Erie location 
2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


ACADEMIC CALENDAR 2 ACADEMIC CALENDAR 


ACADEMIC CALENDAR 


2016 -2017 Academic Calendar 

FALL SEMESTER 
August 
19 Fri Students Arrive / Welcome Week Begins 
22 Mon Welcome Week Concludes/Freshman Service Project 
23 Tues Faculty Convocation/Freshman Convocation/Major 
Orientation 
24 Wed Fall Sem & Mini 1 -Day and Evening Classes Begin 
27 Sat Weekend Classes Begin 
31 Wed Last Day to Drop/Add Classes -Fall Sem & Mini 1 
September 
5 Mon Labor Day -No Classes Held 
22 Thurs MASS OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 
23 Fri Last Day for Pass/Fail -Mini 1 
23-25 Fri -Sun Homecoming Weekend 
30 Fri Last Day to Withdraw -Mini 1 / Summer Incompletes to 
Registrar 
October 
12 Wed Classes End -Mini 1 
13 -16 Thurs-Sun Mid Semester break 
17 Mon Mini Semester 2 Begins -First Day to Drop/Add for Mini 2 
21 Fri Mini Semester 1 Grades Due 
24 Mon Mid-Semester Grades Due / Last Day to Drop/Add Classes 


Mini 2 

November 

1 Tues Advising Day -No Classes Held 
7 Mon Spring Semester & Mini 3/Mini 4 Registration: Seniors 
8 Tues Spring Semester & Mini 3/Mini 4 Registration: Juniors 
9 Wed Spring Semester & Mini 3/Mini 4 Registration: 

Sophomores 

11 Fri Last Day to Declare Pass/Fail on Fall Classes & Mini 2 

16 Wed Spring Semester & Mini 3/Mini 4 Registration: Freshmen 

18 Fri Last Day to Withdraw -Fall Classes & Mini 2 

23 -27 Wed -Sun Thanksgiving Break -No Classes Held 

28 Mon All Classes Resume 

December 

8 Thurs Mini 2 Classes End 
9 Fri Fall Classes End 
10-11 Sat-Sun Weekend Classes Held 
12 Mon Reading Day – No Classes 
13-16 Tues-Fri FINAL EXAMS 
21 Wed Fall and Mini 2 Final Grades Due: 9 a.m. 

SPRING SEMESTER 
January 
16 Mon Spring Semester & Mini 3 Begins / MLK Day -No Spring 
Semester Day Classes Held / Mini 3 and Spring Semester 
Evening Classes Held (those starting at or after 3 p.m.) 
21 Sat Weekend Classes Begin 
23 Mon Last Day to Drop/Add Classes -Spring & Mini 3 
February 
10 Fri Last day for Pass/Fail Mini 3 
17 Fri Fall Semester Incompletes to Registrar / Last Day to 
Withdraw -Mini 3 
March 
3 Fri Classes End -Mini 3 
5-11 Sun -Sat Mid-Semester Break 
12 Sun Spring Weekend Classes Resume 
13 Mon Mini 4 Begins -First Day to Drop/Add for Mini 4 / Spring 
Classes Resume 
20 Mon Last Day to Drop/Add for Mini 4 
April 
7 Fri Last Day to Declare Pass/Fail Spring & Mini 4 
11 Tues Advising Day -No Classes Held 
12 Wed Day Classes Held -No Evening Classes (those starting 
at or after 3 p.m.) 
13-17 Thurs -Mon Easter Break 
18 Tues All Classes Resume 
19 Wed Fall Semester & Mini 1/Mini 2 Registration: Juniors 
20 Thurs Fall Semester & Mini 1/Mini 2 Registration: Sophomores 
21 Fri Fall Semester & Mini 1/Mini 2 Registration: Freshmen / 
Last Day to Withdraw -Spring & Mini 4 
May 
4 Thurs Last Day of Classes -Mini 4 
5 Fri Last Day of Classes -Spring 
6-7 Sat-Sun Weekend Classes Held 
8 Mon Reading Day -No Classes 
9-12 Tues -Fri FINAL EXAMS 
14 Sun Graduation -Baccalaureate Mass 
17 Wed All Grades Due: 9 a.m. 
SUMMER SEMESTER 
TBA 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


AN INTRODUCTION 3 AN INTRODUCTION 


AN INTRODUCTION 


Mercyhurst University is a fully accredited, Catholic, comprehensive 
institution founded in 1926 by the Sisters of Mercy and dedicated to the 
principle that education has the power to transform lives. With an esteemed 
liberal arts curriculum at its core, Mercyhurst emphasizes the dignity of each 
person and is committed to an examination of values as well as to quality 
academic, professional and career training, all within a climate of inquiry, 
collegiality, diversity and achievement. 

Mercyhurst has built a network of distinctive undergraduate and graduate 
programs that extends far beyond its historical roots. Chief among them are 
the pioneering Tom Ridge College of Intelligence Studies and Applied 
Sciences, which also is the university’s leader in online learning initiatives; a 
burgeoning Health Professions and Public Health program; the Mercyhurst 
Center for Applied Politics, a rising star among public opinion polling 
centers; as well as internationally recognized programs in archaeology, 
forensic anthropology and the fine and performing arts. Ever nimble in 
preparing students for today’s global marketplace, Mercyhurst strives 
constantly to be relevant and distinctive in the choice of its academic 
offerings. 

The university enrolls roughly 4,000 men and women and offers more than 
50 undergraduate majors with nearly 70 concentrations and preprofessional 
tracks, nine graduate programs and nearly 30 associate degree 
programs. It maintains a strong commitment to experiential learning; a 
vibrant student and cultural life; championship athletic teams; and a long 
history of service and community engagement. In addition to its Erie 
campus, Mercyhurst provides certificate and associate degree offerings at 
branch campuses in nearby North East and Corry, Pennsylvania, and at the 
Booker T. Washington Center in downtown Erie. It also maintains a 
flourishing academic center in Dungarvan, Ireland. This breadth gives the 
university an unparalleled capacity to educate, to build cross-disciplinary 
academic opportunities and to address complex issues. 

MISSION INTEGRATION 

Higher education in the United States is changing at an unprecedented pace 
and Catholic universities confront pressures and challenges specific to their 
Catholic and sponsorship identity. To help preserve and continue the Mercy 
charism, the Sisters of Mercy established the Conference for Mercy Higher 
Education and Mercyhurst University formed an Office of Mission 
Integration. The latter assists the president in promoting the university’s 
mission with respect to its Catholic and Mercy identity. 

VISION STATEMENT 

Mercyhurst University seeks to be a leading higher educational institution 
that integrates excellence in the liberal arts, professional and career-path 
programs, and service to regional and world communities. 

MISSION STATEMENT 

Consistent with its Catholic identity and Mercy heritage, Mercyhurst 
University educates women and men in a culture where faith and reason 
flourish together, where the beauty and power of the liberal arts combine 
with an appreciation for the dignity of work and a commitment to serving 
others. Confident in the strength of its student-faculty bonds, the university 
community is inspired by the image of students whose choices, in life and 
work, will enable them to realize the human and spiritual values embedded 

in everyday realities and to exercise leadership in service toward a just 
world. 

CORE VALUES 

We are . . . 

Socially merciful, 

Mercy restores human dignity, expands our social relations, and 
empowers us to reach out in compassion to others. 

Globally responsible, 

Globalization challenges us to learn how to steward the resources of the 
Earth wisely and to act in solidarity with its diverse peoples. 

Compassionately hospitable, 

Mercy hospitality begins with self-acceptance, welcomes peoples of 
different faith, ethnic, and cultural traditions, and thus builds 
communities that transcend mere tolerance. 

Intellectually creative, 

Generous, inquiring, and critical habits of mind, which support the 
aspirations for excellence manifested within the academic community, 
encourage us in our lifelong search for what is true, good and beautiful. 

Reflectively aware, 

Our Christian environment encourages self-reflection and contemplation 
of human behavior, promotes balance of mind, body and spirit, and 
ultimately offers the opportunity to develop a moral compass for a life of 
integrity. 

Ambassadors of service. 

UNIVERSITY LEARNING FOR TODAY’S STUDENT 

Dynamic activity in shaping institutional purpose, planning academic 
programs, and meeting the needs of students of all ages — these reflect 
the motto of Mercyhurst University: Carpe Diem, or Seize the Day. 

Dedicated faculty advisors and academic counselors help students make the 
transition to university learning. Close student-faculty relationships give 
purpose and direction to students interested in shaping their university 
education to their goals and interests. The Career Development Center is 
available to guide students in their career exploration process. Computer 
laboratories and other modern facilities keep students competitive and up 
to date for the challenges of tomorrow. 

OFFICIAL COMMUNICATION 

Mercyhurst University recognizes many forms of communication for official 
university business. University officials may utilize written documentation, 
telephone conversations, and Mercyhurst-issued email accounts or web 
documents as formal forms of communication. Official university business 
includes all actions of the university including but not limited to providing 
general information, course information, student conduct notices and 
administrative notices from the university. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


AN INTRODUCTION 4 AN INTRODUCTION 


Mercyhurst provides email accounts to students; these are recognized as 
official document and notification addresses for university communications. 
All students are responsible for checking their Mercyhurst issued email 
accounts and are held accountable for the contents of emails issued by the 
university. 

CAMPUS & BUILDINGS 
Academic & Administrative 

The Mercyhurst campus is situated on a scenic 75-acre hillside overlooking 
Lake Erie and enjoys the advantage of a suburban, pastoral setting only 
minutes from downtown Erie. The heart of campus is Old Main, a majestic 
Tudor-style structure constructed in 1926. It includes classrooms as well as 
the Office of the President, Admissions, Financial Aid and other major 
administrative offices. Old Main connects with Egan and Preston halls, 
which include faculty and staff offices, and overlooks “The Mary Garden.” 

Other prominent structures among the more than 50 buildings comprising 
the Mercyhurst complex include: 

Center for Academic Engagement 

Completed in 2012, the Center for Academic Engagement (CAE) is a 31,000square-
foot, eco-friendly building housing the Intelligence Studies, 
Hospitality and Applied Politics programs. The building is designed around 
the idea that education should be hands-on, collaborative and high-tech. 
The new building includes an enclosed walkway that extends from the 
fourth floor of the CAE to the fourth floor of the Hammermill Library, 
creating a pathway for students from the CAE to Old Main. 

Audrey Hirt Academic Center 

The 45,000-square-foot Audrey Hirt Academic Center was built in 2002 with 
Collegiate Gothic architecture to complement the majestic Tudor style of Old 
Main. Distinguished by a splendid dome visible from the four corners of the 
campus, the Hirt Center contains an atrium, technology-rich classrooms, 
faculty offices and Walker Recital Hall, a performance venue seating 250. 
The Hirt Center also holds facilities for graphic arts, communication 
(including a digital communications lab), education, public health, the 
honors program, the Merciad student newspaper and TV studio. 

Zurn Hall of Science and Fine Arts 

The Zurn Hall of Science and Fine Arts contains classrooms and modern, 
well-equipped science laboratories for archaeology, biology, chemistry, 
forensics, geology, physics and earth-space studies and spacious art studios 
for drawing, painting, ceramics and photography. Zurn Hall is also home to 
the Baltus Observatory, named after Sister M. Matthew Baltus, RSM. It 
consists of a rotary dome housing a 14-inch Celestron reflector telescope 

Hammermill Library 

The Hammermill Library is a fully automated facility; the virtual library is 
accessible 24/7 providing access to most of the library collections. The 
library building provides a safe environment for research and study and is 
equipped with computers and wireless access. Among the library’s holdings 
are book volumes, eBooks and electronic journal databases to support the 
scholarly needs of students. The library maintains late-night hours, and 
weekend hours along with a 24/7 study lounge. It is also home to the 
Thomas J. and Michele Ridge Collection (archives), the Sister Joan Chittister 
Archives and the Veterans Resource Center. Academic Support for tutoring 
operates in the library. The Department of Information Technology along 

with an IT help desk, Writing Center and Language Laboratory are also 
housed within. 

Laboratories 

Mercyhurst University takes pride in maintaining modern, high-tech science 
laboratories, a sampling of which includes the Donald and Judith Alstadt 
Laboratory for Molecular and Cellular Research, Hirtzel Human Anatomy and 
Forensic Anthropology Laboratory, Archaeological Processing Laboratory, 
Ecology Laboratory, Graphic and GIS Laboratory and Stratigraphy and 
Sedimentation Laboratory. 

PERFORMANCE VENUES 
Mary D’Angelo Performing Arts Center 

The Mary D’Angelo Performing Arts Center (PAC) is a spectacularly 
appointed facility built in 1996 on the south side of campus. The center seats 
824 and is the only venue between Erie and Pittsburgh, Buffalo and 
Cleveland capable of handling the technical requirements of the most 
elaborate productions, including ballet and opera. Celebrated for its 
acoustics, the PAC was designed as a showcase for the performing arts and 
hosts cultural events for both the internal and external communities. 
Moreover, it serves as a venue for students and faculty of the university to 
perform in a professional setting. The neighboring D’Angelo Music Building 
is a three-level facility housing an entire floor of practice rooms, five 
classrooms, faculty studios and an all-purpose rehearsal room. The dance 
department also enjoys a complex called danceSpace with two expansive 
studios, faculty and staff offices, lecture room, dressing rooms, lobby and 
student lounge. 

Taylor Little Theatre 

The first performing arts space on campus, Taylor Little Theatre was 
constructed in 1951 as a part of a library expansion project. In recent years, 
the venue has undergone cosmetic changes, adding a state-of-the-art 
projection system and a new sound system. With a seating capacity of 251, 
this intimate space is home to the Mercyhurst Theatre Program. 

Walker Recital Hall 

This performance hall is found inside the Audrey Hirt Academic Center and 
seats 250. It is the chief venue for the annual faculty recital series, guest 
lectures and panel discussions. 

CAMPUS GATHERING SITES 
Mercyhurst Bookstore 

A 7,500-square-foot bookstore and coffee bar affords the college 
community a large selection of trade books, periodicals, newspapers, 
textbooks and a wide assortment of college merchandise. The coffee bar 
features Starbucks coffee, pastries and baked goods, juices and deli 
sandwiches. 

Sister Carolyn Herrmann Student Union 

The Sister Carolyn Herrmann Student Union is a three-story building 
featuring space for student engagement and events. It houses Mercyhurst 
Student Government (MSG) chambers and offices, the Campus Involvement 
Center, Campus Ministry, Multicultural Student Services, Commuter Student 
Lounge, and the Laker Inn, a food court seating 250 and featuring a wide 
variety of convenient dining options. The union is also home to the 
Multicultural and Student Activities Councils. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


AN INTRODUCTION 5 AN INTRODUCTION 


Grotto Commons 

A $3 million renovation in summer 2016 unveiled an inviting, modern 
atmosphere with easily accessible food stations, more eclectic menu items 
and healthy food choices, flex-style seating, enhanced technology, and 
group gathering sites—all in a timeless environment spun of neutrals and 
pops of color to make it fresh and fun. From entree-based small plates to 
deli sandwiches to an abundant salad bar, the dining hall also features an 
allergen-free station devoted to preparing foods, such as gluten-free 
products, for students with allergies. 

Student Housing 

Mercyhurst University is well known for its variety of housing options, 
including residence halls, apartments and townhouses, with a capacity for 
more than 2,000 students. As freshmen, students have three living options: 
Baldwin Hall, an all-female residence hall, McAuley Hall, an all-male 
residence hall, and the co-ed Frances Warde Hall. The sophomore area is 
comprised of nine apartment buildings—seven Briggs apartment buildings 
as well as East and West Duval apartments. Housing for upperclassmen 
includes Briggs and Lewis apartments, Wayne Street apartments, and three 
sets of townhouses (Warde, Lewis, and 41st Street). 

Athletic & Recreational Facilities 

The university’s athletic facilities include the Mercyhurst Athletic Center 
(MAC), the Mercyhurst Ice Center (MIC), the Student Fitness and Recreation 
Center, Tullio Field, and several additional playing fields for soccer, baseball 
and softball. The Mercyhurst Athletic Center houses a gymnasium complex 
with courts for basketball, volleyball and wrestling; crew tanks; and an 
athletic training facility. 

The Rec Center affords each student the opportunity to enhance physical 
performance through a spacious free-weight room with newly added 
hammer-strength equipment and up-to-date cardiovascular machines as 
well as special rooms for aerobics, spinning and martial arts. 

The Mercyhurst Ice Center includes an ice rink, locker rooms, and seating for 
1200. The ice center also is home to the Jerry McCormick Strength and 
Conditioning Center, a varsity athletes-only weightlifting and conditioning 
facility. 

North East Campus 

In the tradition of the Sisters of Mercy and Mercyhurst University, 
Mercyhurst North East provides opportunities in career education by offering 
associate degrees and certificate programs. Additionally, it provides the 
means and opportunity through initial study so that a student may 

ultimately pursue a baccalaureate program. Mercyhurst North East is 
committed to opportunity and access to education for those not currently 
being served by traditional postsecondary education as well as education for 
the traditional student. 

Located in the heart of the largest Concord grape-growing region in the 
world on the shores of Lake Erie, Mercyhurst University's North East Campus 
was founded in 1991 on an 84-acre site that was once home to St. Mary’s 
Seminary. For more than 25 years, students have chosen Mercyhurst North 
East (MNE) as a place to earn a certificate or an associate degree as either 
the start of a bachelor's degree or to find immediate employment. 
MNE offers 34 academic programs, including 26 associate degrees, four 
certificates and two allied health bachelor's degrees: health care science and 
an RN to BSN completion program. MNE competes in 15 NJCAA sports and 
supports more than 20 clubs and organizations. 

Just 15 miles from the Erie campus, MNE facilities include a modernized 
academic/residential building, an academic building and library complex, 24 
townhouses, a beautiful Gothic style church, spacious gymnasium, several 
athletic fields, and sophisticated high-tech laboratories spanning disciplines 
of nursing, culinary arts and anatomy. MNE is also home to the Mercyhurst 
Public Safety Institute and Municipal Police Training Academy. 

Classes are also offered at the Bruce and Arlene Smith Education Center in 
Corry, Pennsylvania, and the Booker T. Washington Center in the city of Erie. 

COMPUTER FACILITIES 

Mercyhurst University is a completely networked campus, including student 
residence halls and apartments. The Mercyhurst campus network provides 
each student access to: the Internet; a personal email account; an individual 
folder for network storage; online courses in Blackboard; online registration; 
grades; and the Hammermill Library collections. Wireless access is available 
throughout campus. Classrooms in all academic buildings are outfitted with 
Internet access and smart podiums including control panels for computers, 
DVD/VCR’s, projection and sound. Computer laboratories available to all 
students are located in Old Main, the Hammermill Library, and in the Hirt 
Academic Center. Lab operating systems include UNIX, Windows and Mac 
OS. Mercyhurst’s computer systems are regularly updated and expanded. 
The university also maintains computer laboratories in many disciplines, 
including business, education, art, interior design, fashion merchandising, 
psychology, hospitality management, archaeology/ anthropology, math and 
physical sciences, the social sciences, and the intelligence studies program. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


6 


STUDENT LIFE 


Mercyhurst University is committed to the growth and development of the 
individual student not only in academic work but in growth as a human 
being living in a community. Recognizing that a student’s learning extends 
beyond the classroom, the university strives to provide a campus 
environment with a variety of developmental, cultural, service, leadership, 
athletic, and social experiences. The cultural and spiritual activities on 
campus give students an opportunity to seek growth and to develop a 
deeper understanding of the world around them. Athletic and social 
activities allow students to bond as members of the university community 
and to engender a sense of pride in their university. During their time at 
Mercyhurst, students have the opportunity to participate in over 85 clubs 
and organizations, attend a variety of social activities, and enjoy an ongoing 
schedule of performing arts events. 

CULTURAL OPPORTUNITIES 

Each semester there are dance, theatre, and music performances on the 
campus, and numerous exhibitions of the works of art faculty and students 
are hosted in the university’s gallery. These events provide an opportunity 
for self-expression and personal development. In addition, the university, in 
association with Mercyhurst Student Government (MSG), brings guest 
speakers to the campus throughout the academic year. The Multicultural 
Student Activities Council and Multicultural Student Services also sponsor a 
wide variety of cultural programming throughout the academic year. 

SOCIAL OPPORTUNITIES 

The social calendar at Mercyhurst provides a well-rounded program of 
activities and gives all elements of the university community a chance to 
socialize. In addition to the regular schedule of social activities, the 
university celebrates several major events throughout the course of the year. 
These events, sponsored by the Student Activities Council (SAC), start in late 
September/early October with Hurst Day. Other special events are hosted 
throughout the year, including Family Weekend and SpringFest, a weekend 
of outdoor activities culminating with a featured musical act. 

CAMPUS MINISTRY 

Campus Ministry acts as the locus for spiritual life on campus. Recognizing 
and celebrating its Catholic identity, Campus Ministry provides spiritual 
practices for the campus community. By its grounding in the Catholic and 
Mercy tradition, Campus Ministry also extends outreach to students from 
Protestant and other religious backgrounds. Campus Ministry offers a rich 
variety of prayer/worship opportunities, spiritual guidance, community-
building and service opportunities. Located on the main level of the Carolyn 
Herrmann Student Union, the Campus Ministry lounge has traditionally 
been a place of gathering, offering warm hospitality and a welcoming 
atmosphere. 

Campus Ministry offers spiritual practices that include: daily and Sunday 
masses, reconciliation, the RCIA process, a chapel choir, liturgical ministries 
and weekly devotional practices such as rosary and Eucharistic exposition. 
Campus Ministry also provides periodic ecumenical Christian worship, 
weekly Christian fellowship, Bible studies, a variety of very popular retreats, 
interfaith meditation and speakers, interfaith discussion groups, individual 
pastoral counseling and spiritual direction, special prayer services and 

memorials, a variety of community-building activities and many 
opportunities to connect with local faith communities. Those who wish to 
express their faith through service may become involved in a variety of local 
service opportunities including soup kitchen service, Habitat for Humanity 
and a dynamic Catholic retreat ministry for local youth. Several annual local, 
national and international service trips are also coordinated through 
Campus Ministry in collaboration with Service Learning. Following the 
example of Catholic doctrine and the Mercy tradition, social justice issues are 
addressed through student groups focusing on peace and justice, human 
rights and pro-life activities. Campus Ministry’s many student leaders offer 
servant leadership and spiritual mentorship to the student body. 

Campus Ministry is also responsible for scheduling weddings for alumni and 
staff in Christ the King Chapel. For complete details of activities as well as a 
calendar of events, please sign up to receive our weekly e-bulletin. Campus 
Ministry also has an active Facebook page. 

Campus Ministry at the North East campus is established to provide a clergy 
presence and spiritual opportunities for growth in this close-knit 
community. The Campus Ministry Office offers counseling, spiritual 
direction, retreats, service and hospitality while it fosters a community of 
believers who develop their faith through prayer, service, celebration, study 
and fellowship 

EXPERIENTIAL LEARNING 

Experiential learning is the process of making meaning from direct 
experience. At Mercyhurst, this is the focus of the Campus Involvement 
Center and the Career Development Center. Our mutual goal is to enrich 
student learning by engaging in community-based experiences to integrate 
academic knowledge, leadership experiences, internships, professional 
development and active citizenship. Mercyhurst believes that student 
participation in experiential activities has a significant impact on their 
professional development and is consistent with the mission of the 
University. Together we work to coordinate and offer students the 
opportunity to learn, serve, experience, and engage beyond the classroom. 

CAMPUS INVOLVEMENT CENTER 

The Campus Involvement Center (CIC) advances student success by 
providing opportunities to engage in social, leadership, and experiential 
activities. We strive to connect students to Mercyhurst through: 

• 
Honoring traditions and spirit 
• 
Providing involvement opportunities 
• 
Fostering intellectual development 
• 
Mentoring students through self-awareness 
The CIC is conveniently located on the second floor of the Student Union. It 
serves as a central location for students to get involved with campus 
activities and events and meet new people. The Student Union is an 
environment that is welcoming and one in which students can fully interact 
and participate in a range of academic, social, spiritual and cultural 
activities. It is a wireless building which houses a computer/print station, 
Recognized Student Clubs/Organizations (RSCOs) meeting space, a 
Commuter Lounge as well as a gaming area sponsored by Mercyhurst 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


STUDENT LIFE 7 STUDENT LIFE 


Student Government, complete with a pool table and foosball tables and 
flat screen TV’s with Direct TV. 

CAREER DEVELOPMENT CENTER 

The Career Development Center (CDC) is located on the first floor of Egan 
Hall. The CDC provides career counseling, resume and cover letter 
construction, job search and interview assistance, mock interview practice 
and help with graduate school applications. The hub of the CDC is 
CareerConnect, an online career management system. Available jobs, 
internships and other career related activities are posted on CareerConnect. 
Students can post their resumes and credentials for review by prospective 
employers and can schedule interviews with on campus recruiters with a 
simple click of the mouse. Students can create “job search agents” that will 
notify them anytime a new job is posted on the system. Accounts are 
created for all students to use during their stay at the university, and the 
service is available to Alumni as well. The CDC has also purchased a site 
license for the campus allowing each Mercyhurst student access to 
CareerShift (careershift.com), an excellent job search website. 
CareerShift can also help students network with Mercyhurst Alumni. 
Contact the Career Development Center if you require assistance accessing 
either site. 814-824-2426. 

For undecided students or students considering a change of major/minor, 
the CDC utilizes self-guided assessments for students to determine their 
most appropriate career path. The CDC also provides access to the “What 
Can I Do with This Major” exploration tool. Students can discuss feedback 
from these assessments with any Career Development staff member. 

The CDC also hosts a Spring Career Fair and several targeted major mini fairs 
in the fall term. These annual events attract approximately 90-100 
organizations, which offer part-time and full-time jobs and internship 
opportunities. The Fair is also utilized by freshmen and sophomores as a 
career exploration tool. 

THE COUNSELING CENTER 

The Counseling Center offers counseling as well as a variety of programs 
designed to support and enhance students’ well-being and personal 
growth. Services are geared toward helping students resolve emotional and 
relationship concerns, improve personal skills, have a successful university 
experience, and reach individual goals. 

Counseling services are confidential and free to any student who is currently 
enrolled. The staff is comprised of licensed psychologists, social workers 
and/or counselors with significant experience in working with young adults. 
These clinicians provide individual counseling, group therapy, crisis 
intervention and biofeedback, as well as workshops and consultation. The 
counselors also make referrals to other professionals and agencies as 
appropriate. They provide consultation to university faculty and staff upon 
request. 

The Counseling Center is located on the second floor of the Cohen Health 
Center and has daytime hours available, with some evening times as 
needed. It is open throughout the main academic year, and closed during 
the summer months. Many of the issues which students present are those 
which occur with the normal transitions of leaving home, entering 
adulthood, and developing healthy, significant relationships. Counselors 
also work with students experiencing depression, anxiety, loss or trauma. In 

many instances, students may find that a relatively short period of 
counseling allows them to readily resolve a concern. In some circumstances, 
issues may be more complex and require a longer exploration of the 
psychological, relational, or emotional concerns. Whatever the presenting 
problem, counseling seeks to help individuals more fully realize their 
personal worth and potential and more successfully engage in life at 
Mercyhurst University and prepare for life after university. To schedule an 
appointment with a counselor, call the Counseling Center at 814-824-3650. 

ATHLETICS 

Mercyhurst University competes at the National Collegiate Athletic 
Association Division II level in 21 varsity sports and in the Division I level for 
Men’s and Women’s Ice Hockey. Men’s rowing competes at the varsity level 
for a total of 24 varsity sports. 

In addition, Mercyhurst participates in a number of athletic conferences. The 
affiliations include the Great Midwest Athletic Conference, the Pennsylvania 
State Athletic Conference, Atlantic Hockey Association (men), College 
Hockey America (women), Collegiate Water Polo Association (men) and 
Western Water Polo Association (women). 

NATIONAL COLLEGIATE ATHLETIC ASSOCIATION 
Division I 

Men’s Ice Hockey Women’s Ice Hockey 

Division II 

Baseball Softball 
Men’s Basketball Women’s Basketball 
Men’s Soccer Women’s Soccer 
Men’s Cross Country Women’s Cross Country 
Men’s Tennis Women’s Tennis 
Football Women’s Field Hockey 
Men’s Rowing (non-NCAA) Women’s Rowing 
Men’s Golf Women’s Golf 
Men’s Water Polo Women’s Water Polo 
Men’s Lacrosse Women’s Lacrosse 
Men’s Wrestling Women’s Volleyball 

MERCYHURST AND THE NCAA 

Since 1982, the Lakers have participated in the NCAA at various levels, from 
Division I to III. The organization was officially formed in 1906 and has 
grown to encompass 1,500 colleges and universities. The NCAA draws its 
members from a diverse group ranging from large state institutions to 
privately funded universities. But all of its members are trying to reach a 
common goal—the advancement and achievement of the student-athlete 
and the common good of higher education. 

PENNSYLVANIA STATE ATHLETIC CONFERENCE Sport Sponsorship 

Baseball Softball 
Men’s Basketball Men’s Soccer 
Women’s Basketball Women’s Soccer 
Men’s Cross Country Men’s Golf 
Women’s Cross Country Women’s Golf 
Men’s Tennis Women’s Tennis 
Women’s Lacrosse Wrestling 
Football Field Hockey 
Women’s Volleyball 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


STUDENT LIFE 
8 STUDENT LIFE 


Mercyhurst and the PSAC 

On July 1, 2008, Mercyhurst entered a new era in university athletics with its 
admission to the Pennsylvania State Athletic Conference (PSAC). 

Conference Members 

Bloomsburg California 
Cheyney Clarion 

E. Stroudsburg Edinboro 
Gannon IUP 
Kutztown Lock Haven 
Mansfield Mercyhurst 
Millersville Seton Hill 
Shippensburg Slippery Rock 
Pitt-Johnstown West Chester 
Mercyhurst and Atlantic Hockey 

Mercyhurst was accepted into the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference in 
Division I Hockey for the 1999-2000 season. In July 2003, the MAAC 
discontinued sponsoring hockey because only one of its schools had men’s 
ice hockey. The same former members of the MAAC formed a new 
conference called the Atlantic Hockey Conference effective in the 2003-2004 
season. 

Atlantic Hockey Association Members 
Air Force Academy – Colorado Springs, CO 
American International University – Springfield, MA 
Bentley University – Waltham, MA 
Canisius University – Buffalo, NY 
University of Holy Cross – Worcester, MA 
Mercyhurst University – Erie, PA 
Niagara University – Buffalo, BY 
Robert Morris University – Pittsburgh, PA 
Sacred Heart University – Fairfield, CT 
United States Military Academy (Army) – West Point, NY 
Rochester Institute of Technology 

The AHA is one of five Division I Hockey Conferences for men in the country. 

Mercyhurst and the CHA 

Beginning in 2002-2003, Mercyhurst women’s ice hockey team became a 
charter member of the newly formed Division I College Hockey America 
conference. The other members are Lindenwood, Penn State, RIT, Robert 
Morris and Syracuse. 

ATHLETIC ELIGIBILITY 

The operative policy on athletic eligibility at Mercyhurst University is: 

1. 
In general, student-athletes must be in good standing as 
defined by Mercyhurst University. 
2. 
Student-athletes must maintain progress towards degree as 
defined by NCAA standards, which include a specified number of 
credits earned per semester and per academic year as well as a 
minimum cumulative grade point average following every term. 
CLUB SPORTS 

Mercyhurst provides club sports as a way to encourage participation in 
activities that enhance health and well-being, in addition to fostering a 
sense of community and inclusion within the Laker campus. Club sports 
offer students a chance to learn a new sport, keep fit and compete against 
other university clubs or varsity teams. All clubs are open to any full-time 
student with any level of experience. Here is a list of club sports offered: 

Men’s and Women’s Rowing 
ACHA Ice Hockey 
Equestrian 

INTRAMURAL SPORTS 

The intramural segment of the Lakers’ program serves the recreational 
needs of our students. Intramurals enhance the closeness and cooperation 
of the athletes while improving their physical conditioning and skills. 
Mercyhurst offers a variety of intramural sports during the course of the 
academic year. Here is a list of the sports offered in the course of the Fall and 
Spring Semesters: 

Events 

Flag Football Coed Volleyball 
Ultimate Frisbee Tennis Tournament 
Softball Faculty-Staff Golf Tournament 
Men’s Basketball Bowling Tournament 
Women’s Basketball Men’s Indoor Soccer 
Hockey Women’s Indoor Soccer 
Soft Lacrosse Men’s Softball 
Sand Volleyball Women’s Softball 
Laker Olympics 

RESIDENCE LIFE 

The Residence Life program at Mercyhurst University recognizes that 
learning extends beyond the classroom and continues into the areas in 
which students live. Therefore, Residence Life seeks to be an integral part of 
the educational opportunities at Mercyhurst and strives to create an 
environment that enhances student growth socially, culturally, physically 
and emotionally while fostering academic success. 

All undergraduate students are required to live on campus in university 
housing unless they are a designated “commuter” by the Admissions Office. 
Juniors and seniors may request an exemption to be permitted to live off-
campus. Freshmen, sophomores, and athletes—who are not designated as 
commuters—are required to live in university housing; exemptions for 
these students will not be granted. 

First-year resident students are not allowed to have vehicles while at the 
university. 

Approximately 90 percent of traditional freshmen live on campus in 
residence halls. Mercyhurst views campus housing as a necessary privilege. 
Residents are required to sign a housing contract for one full academic year. 
If after submitting this contract, the student decides to leave campus 
housing at any time or withdraws from the university during that academic 
year, the student will be responsible for a $500 breach of contract charge. If 
a student withdraws or leaves the university during the semester within the 
occupancy period, housing and board charges will be refunded on a prorated 
basis, until calendar day 30, after which there will be no refund. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


STUDENT LIFE 9 STUDENT LIFE 


Freshman housing includes: Warde Hall, housing 350 students; McAuley 
Hall, housing 175 men; and Baldwin Hall, housing 200 women. Most 
freshmen are housed in doubles, but triple rooms in Warde Hall may also be 
assigned. Each freshman residence hall has its own laundry areas, vending 
machines and lounges. An Assistant Director, a live-in professional 
administrator, oversees the freshman residence halls. Each hall is directly 
supervised by a Hall Director, a live-in graduate student, who is assisted by 
Resident Assistants. 

Resident Assistants are upperclassmen who live on the floors with the 
freshman residents. RAs plan and implement social, educational and 
cultural events in the living areas to ensure an atmosphere conducive to the 
academic mission of the university. Freshmen living on campus are required 
to board at the university. The University Dining Service provides the meals. 
The student dining room, Grotto Commons, is located in Egan Hall. All 
freshman housing areas close for Thanksgiving, Christmas and Spring 
breaks, and at the end of semesters. Residents must leave housing when the 
housing areas close. Should extenuating circumstances require that a 
student remain in residence during one of these periods, prior approval 
must be obtained from the Residence Life Office. Students permitted to 
remain in residence over breaks may be reassigned to alternative housing 
for the break period. 

Upperclassmen live in apartments or townhouses. Each apartment consists 
of two bedrooms, a living room, bathroom, and kitchen. These apartments 
house four residents (limited triples may be available). There are 17 
townhouses available for 6-person occupancy, three 5-person townhouses, 
and six 4-person townhouses. Townhouses generally have three bedrooms, 
one and a half bathrooms, and modern kitchen/dining areas. Many, but not 
all, townhouses have full basements, with washers and dryers, and central 
air conditioning. 

Upperclassman housing areas are supervised by Assistant Directors, live-in 
professional administrators, who are assisted by Resident Assistants. 
Resident Assistants live in the building and create a community in their 
building through the use of social, educational and cultural programs. RAs 
also maintain an atmosphere conducive to the academic mission of the 
university within their building. 

OFF-CAMPUS LIVING 

All undergraduate students are required to live on campus in university 
housing unless they are a designated “commuter” by the Admissions Office. 
Juniors and seniors may request an exemption to be permitted to live off-
campus. Freshmen, sophomores, and athletes—who are not designated as 
commuters—are required to live in university housing; exemptions for 
these students will not be granted. 

Eligible students must fill out and submit an “Off-Campus Declaration” form 
providing information about their off-campus residence. Any changes in 
residency must be reported to the Residence Life Office. 

Students residing off-campus must abide by the Student Conduct Code, 
Student Handbook, local ordinances, and applicable local, state and federal 
laws. Failure to do so will result in adjudication through the Student 
Conduct Process, which may result in the student’s off-campus living 
privilege being revoked. The university reserves the right to limit the 
number of students approved to live off-campus. 

THE STUDENT HANDBOOK 

In addition to this catalog, the university publishes the Student Handbook. 
The Handbook is written to provide students with an understanding of the 
culture and community of Mercyhurst University as well as to provide 
behavioral standards and consequences for misbehavior. Included in the 
Handbook is information on various university departments and offices, the 
Student Conduct Code, residential policies, etc. Students are responsible for 
the information contained in the Handbook and for seeking clarification of 
that information as needed. The Handbook is available to all students on the 
university’s web site and can be accessed on-line at 
my.mercyhurst.edu/handbook. 

STUDENT CONDUCT CODE 

Mercyhurst University, as a community of learning dedicated to the lifelong 
development of the whole person, is where students gather knowledge, 
insights, skills and the vision necessary to attain fulfillment of the goals they 
have set for themselves. It is within this community that every member of 
the university is encouraged and aided to meet the standards set by the 
university. These standards establish a base upon which the student builds a 
quality of life reflecting good citizenship, vigilance, and concern for the less 
fortunate. 

It is from these ideals that we have developed the conduct code at 
Mercyhurst University. Excessive regulation, tedious debate, and 
contentious challenges are not the aim of this conduct code. The focus of the 
conduct code is personal responsibility, good judgment, responsible 
stewardship, and concern for an improved quality of life for the whole 
community. Conduct violations are adjudicated by the Director of Residence 
Life and Student Conduct, Assistant Directors, Hall Directors or the Conduct 
Board. All decisions may be reviewed through an appeal process. 

MERCYHURST STUDENT GOVERNMENT 

Through its elected officers and senators, Mercyhurst Student Government 
(MSG) is the voice of all students at Mercyhurst University. It is a 
multifunctional organization that serves the Mercyhurst University and the 
city of Erie communities. MSG acts as a liaison between students and the 
administration. MSG, in conjunction with the Campus Involvement Center, 
officially recognizes student clubs and organizations. All students are invited 
to become involved with MSG at any level by contacting an officer, senator 
or simply by attending an MSG meeting on Monday evenings at 7:30 p.m. in 
the MSG Chambers, second floor of the Student Union. 

All MSG meetings are open to the entire Mercyhurst community. 

ACTIVITIES COUNCILS 

The Multicultural Activities Council (MAC) and Student Activities Council 
(SAC) are the primary student programming organizations on campus 
whose function is to provide activities that will enrich the university 
community both socially and culturally. The councils are composed of a 12member 
executive board and an active general membership. 

All students are encouraged to participate in the councils by planning events 
as well as by participating in activities, which are generally held on Friday 
and Saturday evenings throughout the academic year. Some of the many 
activities have included tournaments, dance parties, movies, coffee houses, 
comedians, VIBEs, bands, hypnotists and spirited competitions for athletic 
events. Special events such as formals and fests are also held throughout the 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


STUDENT LIFE 10 STUDENT LIFE 


year, in conjunction with MSG. All events are published in a monthly 
activities calendar distributed via The Weekender. To become involved, 
students should call or stop by the SAC/MAC office, located on the lower 
level of the Student Union. General meetings are held monthly and are 
open to the entire Mercyhurst community. 

STUDENT PUBLICATIONS 

The Merciad is a student newspaper published weekly online and in print as 
the voice of the Mercyhurst community. It provides an opportunity for 
students to develop their journalistic skills and provides a forum for 
opinions. The Merciad has been published since 1929. Lumen, a literary 
magazine, is developed by students and is sponsored by the English 
Department. 

COHEN STUDENT HEALTH CENTER 

The Cohen Student Health Center provides primary care health services to 
the student body. The concept of “preventive medicine” and “wellness” is 
promoted through educational events on campus and “one-to-one health 
education.” Located near the campus bookstore, the Health Center provides 
physician and nursing hours on a daily basis Monday through Friday during 
the business day. Appointments can be made by calling the Health Center at 
814-824-2431. 

Students are not charged or billed for their Cohen Student Health Center 
visit. If diagnostic testing, prescription medications or specialist services are 
required, the student will be referred into the community as appropriate. In 
this event, the community providers of those services will bill insurance or 
charge the student. All students are expected to be covered by a family 
health insurance plan or enroll in the student health insurance plan through 
the university. Students requiring medical care in the evening or on an 
emergency basis can find a list of after hour community providers on the 
Health Center portal. 

A Pre-Admission Health Record, including a completed Immunization 
Record, is required of all students prior to admission. Transfer students and 
graduate students are required to have previous health records, including 
immunization records, transferred from their former academic institutions. 

The Health Center can assist students requiring a physical or TB testing for a 
clinical placement, internship or student teaching. The Health Center can 
also help students with referrals to area specialists. 

POLICE AND SAFETY SERVICES 

The Police and Safety Department’s primary responsibility is the safety of 
the Mercyhurst University community, and the security of the university and 
university community assets. Other responsibilities include the investigation 
of theft, criminal mischief and other criminal incidents occurring on campus. 

The enforcement of parking regulations and vehicle traffic control is 
maintained by assessing penalties in the form of fines and through campus 
automobile registration. Vehicles are towed when parked in designated 
tow-away zones, or when necessary during snow emergency/removal 
operations. A wheel-locking device may be placed on a vehicle’s wheel to 
prevent movement if it is determined that the driver is a chronic offender, or 
if the owner or operator of a particular vehicle fails to pay fines which accrue 
in a significant amount. 

All matters relating to institutional or student safety and security are 
reported directly to the Police and Safety Department for appropriate action. 
The Police and Safety office is located in the lower level of McAuley Hall and 
can be reached by calling 814-824-2304 

PARKING 

First-year resident freshmen students are not permitted to bring a vehicle to 
Mercyhurst University. 

There are 24 parking lots on and off campus to accommodate parking for 
students, visitors and employees. All underground parking lots are restricted 
for use only by individuals paying for specific parking spots. 

Parking permit placards are issued on a daily basis or when needed. 

All students planning to bring a vehicle to campus must register their 
vehicle on line with the Police and Safety Department prior to their arrival at 
Mercyhurst University. Upon arrival, the student must report to the Police 
and Safety Department office with their vehicle, driver’s license, vehicle 
registration and proof of vehicle insurance. After review, a parking permit 
will be affixed to the back windshield. Parking permits for student vehicles 
will be issued between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. Monday 
through Friday, excluding holidays and university closed days. 

Parking permits are available for non-registered vehicles being used 
temporarily by students, and visitor parking passes are available for 
university guests at the Police and Safety Department office 24 hours a day, 
seven days a week, including holidays and university closed days. 

Police and Safety requests that all cars have a permit so we know who is on 
our campus. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


11 


ACADEMIC AFFAIRS 


The academic area of the university is organized into four colleges. Each 
college is coordinated by a dean who reports to the provost. Associate 
deans are appointed within each college to oversee evaluation issues and 
assist the deans. Colleges are divided into separate departments, each of 
which offers a major(s) and/or minor(s). Departments are administered by 
chairpersons who coordinate their operations with the dean and associate 
dean of the respective college. 

HAFENMAIER COLLEGE OF HUMANITITES, ARTS AND SOCIAL 
SCIENCES 
Dean: Leanne Roberts, Ph.D. Associate Dean: Gerard Tobin, 
Ph.D. 


Anthropology/Archaeology, Art, Art Therapy, Catholic Studies, Dance, 
Education, English, History, Liberal Arts, Music, Philosophy, Psychology, 
Religious Studies, Sustainability Studies, World Languages 

RIDGE COLLEGE OF INTELLIGENCE STUDIES AND APPLIED 
SCIENCES 
Dean: James Breckenridge, Ph.D. Associate Dean: Randall 
Clemons, Ph.D. 

Applied Forensic Sciences, Applied Sociology, Communications, Criminal 
Justice, Data Science, Information Technology, Intelligence Studies, 
Mathematics, Political Science, Social Work 

WALKER COLLEGE OF BUSINESS 
Dean: Mary Breckenridge, D.Ed. Associate Dean: Amy Doolan 
Ph.D. 

Accounting, Business Economics, Fashion Merchandising, Finance, 
Hospitality Management, Interior Architectural Design, International 
Business, Management, Marketing, Sport Business Management 

ZURN COLLEGE OF NATURAL AND HEALTH SCIENCES 
Dean: Michael Elnitsky, Ph.D. Associate Dean: Amy Parente, 
Ph.D. 


Athletic Training, Biology, Biochemistry, Bioinformatics, Chemistry, Exercise 
Science, Geology, Health Care Science, Nursing (RN-BSN), Physics, Public 
Health, Sports Medicine 

GLOBAL PROGRAMS AND EXPERIENTIAL LEARNING 
Dean: Heidi Hosey-McGurk, Ph.D. 

ACADEMIC CALENDAR 

The university operates on a two-semester academic calendar; each 
semester is 16 weeks long. Additionally, two eight-week mini-semesters 
run concurrently with the traditional semester, offering students the 
opportunity to study courses in a more focused manner. Students on 
average take 10 courses per year. A limited number of courses are also 
offered in the evening and on weekends. The Fall Semester begins about the 
third week in August and runs until the middle of December. The Spring 
Semester starts at the end of January and continues until mid-May with a 
spring break mid-way. 

SUMMER SESSIONS 

Mercyhurst operates with a variety of summer sessions. Online offerings and 
graduate classes are usually offered during a nine-week session. A normal 
load for students during the summer is two courses (or a six-credit 
internship). The schedule of summer courses is available mid-March. A 
complete listing may be accessed at the website, mercyhurst.edu. 
Preregistration for summer courses is conducted after the schedule is 
published and continues through the Spring Semester. Room and board 
accommodations are available during the summer sessions. 

GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS 
The graduation requirements for the Bachelor of Arts, Bachelor of 
Fine Arts, Bachelor of Music and Bachelor of Science degree are: 

1. That a minimum of 121 credits be successfully completed. 
2. That at least 30 credits be taken in the major program unless the program 
has been exempted from this regulation. 
3. That all of the courses in the REACH Curriculum be successfully completed. 
Students are personally responsible for ensuring that they meet these 
requirements. If a student has a question about any one of the courses, the 
question should be referred to the Registrar or the Office of the Provost. 
4. That a cumulative grade point average of at least C (2.0 GPA) or higher be 
earned as specified by program requirements. 
5. That all requirements in the major department be successfully met. This 
includes the required cumulative GPA, the required courses, theses, etc. 
6. That at least 46 credits be completed at Mercyhurst. This includes at least 
half the total credits in the major program. 
7. That at least 24 credits of the last 30 be completed under the auspices of 
Mercyhurst University. 
8. Credits with a course number 098 and 099 DO NOT count toward 
graduation. 
9. Only six credits offered by the Department of Military Science (ROTC) 
count toward graduation. 
The graduation requirements for the Associate of Science and 
Associate of Arts degrees are: 

1. That a minimum of 60 credits be successfully completed (exclusive of lab 
credits). 
2. That a student take at least 15 credits outside the departmental area. 
3. That a minimum cumulative GPA of 2.0 be earned as specified in program 
requirements. 
4. That all requirements of the program be successfully completed. This 
includes the required cumulative average, the required courses, internships, 
etc. 
5. That at least half the total credits in the program be completed at 
Mercyhurst University. 
6. That the Associate Degree cannot be designated retroactively after a 
Bachelor’s Degree has been earned. 
DEGREE COMPLETION TIME FRAMES 

Degree requirements must be completed within 10 years of the date from 
which the student first matriculated at Mercyhurst. Earned credits over 10 
years old will only apply to a degree if the grade for that credit is C (2.0) or 
better and when accepted as applicable by the Vice President of Academic 
Affairs. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


ACADEMIC AFFAIRS 
12 ACADEMIC AFFAIRS 


APPLICATION FOR GRADUATION 

A preliminary mailing to potential graduates is sent in the early part of fall 
semester. Students who complete all requirements of Mercyhurst University 
should make application to the Registrar for graduation before February 1 of 
the senior year. Application forms must carry the signature of the 
department chair indicating which major requirements should be 
successfully completed before the end of spring semester. Students who do 
not complete their program before the end of spring semester, but who 
could do so by the end of the fall semester following the graduation 
ceremony in May by taking no more than nine credits, may participate in the 
graduation ceremonies. Students who have completed their program except 
for student teaching may also participate in the graduation ceremonies. 
Students will not receive a signed diploma until graduation requirements 
are met. Any change in a student’s graduation status must be reported to 
the Registrar’s Office by April 15. 

STATEMENT OF RESPONSIBILITY 

It is the responsibility of each student to know both the university-wide 
graduation requirements as well as those in their chosen major, and to meet 
all requirements satisfactorily for graduation. Students have the assistance 
of numerous university personnel to help them understand these 
requirements. The academic advisor, the department chairperson, the 
college dean, the Office for Academic Affairs, and the Registrar’s Office are 
all available to answer questions about these requirements. It is the 
responsibility of each student to use his/her program evaluation on 
WebAdvisor to determine what courses he/she needs to take. 

REACH CURRICULUM 

Beginning in Fall 2016, all entering students now must complete the new 
REACH Curriculum. In the case of students returning to the university after 
an interruption of study, these students also must complete this new REACH 
Curriculum. 

Freshman Year Experience 

The Freshman Year Experience is about helping students as they begin their 
journey of reaching toward success. These courses are intended to be an 
introduction to academic writing and thought, as well as college life. Each 
student will be required to take three courses as part of their Freshman Year 
Experience: 

• 
iMU 101 – Introduction to Mercyhurst (1 credit) 
• 
iMU 102 – Involvement at Mercyhurst (1 credit) 
• 
COMP 120 – Writing and Research (3 credits) 
Liberal Arts Experience 

In the Liberal Arts Experience, students continue to reach for their goals and 
have the opportunity to expand their understanding of knowledge, 
contexts, ideas, and disciplines. Each student will be required to take two 
courses at the 100 or 200 level from each of the following areas of the 
Liberal Arts Experience. Note that no two prefixes in the Liberal Arts 
Experience can be the same. 

• 
Reason & Faith (6 credits) 
o 
CST, PHIL, RLST 
• 
Expression (6 credits, at least one course must be ENG) 
o 
ART, DANC, ENG, MUS, THEA 
• 
Analytical (7 credits, one course must be a science with a lab) 
o 
(BIO, CHEM, GEOL, MATH, PHYS, SCI, STAT) 
• 
Contexts and Systems (6 credits) 
o 
(ECON, HIS, POLI) 
• 
Humans in Connection (6 credits) 
o 
(ANTH, PSYC, SOC, WL & Related WL Prefixes – ASIA, 
FREN, CHNS, SPAN, RUSS, etc.) 
Senior Experience 

The Senior Experience is where students see their efforts realized as they 
take command of their futures. The Senior Experience is the culmination of 
academic knowledge and personal growth, and allows students to 
intertwine their major and liberal arts curriculum in a way that 
demonstrates their transformational education. Within the REACH 
Curriculum, each student will be required to take, as a part of their Senior 
Experience: 

• 
ETH 400 – Reach Capstone 
• 
A capstone experience identified within their major program 
outREACH 

The outREACH experience provides students with opportunities to 
participate in service learning and civic engagement through a variety of 
opportunities including study away or study abroad. Each student will be 
required to enroll in at least one approved Beyond the Gates (BTG) 
experience with one credit. 

NOTES: ENG 098 and MATH 099 courses are not part of the REACH 
Curriculum. Although they earn university credits, these credits do not count 
toward graduation. A course cannot count for more than one REACH 
requirement. 

SCIENCE LAB COURSES 

Laboratory credits assigned to science courses are treated as follows 
(effective Fall Term 2007): 

• Grades earned in these courses are calculated in the GPA and the credit is 
posted on the transcript. 
• The lab is worth one credit, which counts toward the 121-credit graduation 
requirement. 
• Students pay a lab fee. 
• Students may purchase up to two academic credits for science labs taken 
prior to Fall 2007. The purchase of credit form is available in the Registrar’s 
Office (106 Main). 
MAJORS AND DOUBLE MAJORS 

In addition to the breadth of learning that occurs in Mercyhurst’s REACH 
Curriculum, students are expected to choose one area of study that meets 
their intellectual interests and career needs. This is the student’s major, a 
specific field of study with its particular scope, content and methods. Upon 
graduation in a specific major, students are presumed to have a command of 
the intellectual history of the discipline, knowledge of contemporary issues 
and problems in that discipline, and the repertoire of methods and 
approaches needed for creative contributions to that discipline. 

Mercyhurst recognizes that some students wish to enhance their 
educational experience by obtaining majors in two departments. Such an 
academic program is challenging, as the student is expected to take 
significant additional coursework while meeting the rigorous academic 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


ACADEMIC AFFAIRS 
13 ACADEMIC AFFAIRS 


standards of two departments. Specific requirements for those wishing to 
obtain a double major are: 

1. 
The approval/signatures of appropriate department chair(s) and/or 
college dean(s); 
2. 
The expectation to develop expertise in two distinct areas of study; 
each of which has its own intellectual history, unique content, and 
methods of inquiry. Students will be expected to meet all major 
requirements for each department. 
Some students may choose to double-major in closely related fields. In this 
case the students will be required to take eight uniquely distinct courses in 
each major. In some cases, this minimum course requirement for each major 
might mean that students will have to take departmental courses or 
independent studies in addition to the listed requirements in one or the 
other discipline in order to establish the uniqueness of each intellectual 
discipline and to assure the intellectual integrity of major and double-major. 

MINOR PROGRAM 

Students often find that a minor area of specialization adds considerably to 
their educational program. While choosing a minor is not required, 
Mercyhurst encourages students to examine the possibility of a minor in 
addition to the major. If students choose to minor in a field that is closely 
related to their major and/or an additional minor, each minor would be 
required to consist of four uniquely distinct courses. 

CONTRACT MAJOR/MINOR 

Students who wish to develop a major or minor program not currently listed 
in the University Catalog may elect to put together an individualized 
contract major or minor. With the help and advice of at least two full-time 
faculty members, a student can choose offerings from several disciplines 
that meet a unique set of objectives or prepare him or her for a specialized 
job or career. Such a major or minor must not duplicate all, or even a 
substantial portion of, an existing program. Contract majors will typically be 
titled as a Multi-Disciplinary major with two concentration areas. All 
contract majors will be Bachelor of Arts degrees. The final decision about the 
major or minor rests with the Office of the Provost. 

Student eligibility for the contract major or minor option is determined as 
follows: 

1. 
Students who have completed a minimum of 30 credit hours with a 
GPA of 2.80 or better may elect a contract major or minor. 
2. 
Students who, at the completion of 60 credit hours, have maintained a 
GPA of 2.50 or better may elect a contract major or minor. 
3. 
Students who have completed more than 60 credit hours or who are 
beyond the first semester of their junior year are not eligible for a 
contract major. 
4. 
Students who have completed more than 90 credit hours or who are 
beyond the first semester of their senior year are not eligible for a 
contract major or minor. 
Students who are approved for a contract major or minor will be required to 
meet the graduation requirements stated in the current University Catalog. 

Specific requirements of the contract major are as follows: 

At least 36 credit hours must be taken in the major. No more than 45 credit 
hours (excluding one-credit hour laboratories taken in conjunction with a 
regular course) may be required. 

A student must earn a minimum GPA of 2.5. 

Specific requirements of the contract minor are as follows: 

At least 18 credit hours must be taken in the minor. 

A minimum GPA may be set at the discretion of the supervising faculty. 
Students who are eligible for, and who wish to develop, a contract major or 
minor must complete the following steps: 

1. 
Secure the permission of one or two full-time faculty members who 
are willing to help as advisors. 
2. 
Prepare a written proposal outlining the rationale for the major or 
minor and a list of the courses that will be required. 
3. 
Obtain the signature(s) of the faculty advisor(s) as acceptance of the 
proposed major or minor. 
4. 
Obtain the signature of the provost as a sign of his or her acceptance of 
the proposed major or minor. 
5. 
Have a copy of the contract placed in the student’s permanent file in 
the Registrar’s Office and have copies prepared for each of the faculty 
advisors. 
Any changes in the approved program of study will require the signatures of 
the faculty advisors and the Office of the Provost prior to implementation of 
the change. Upon the successful completion of the courses and all other 
graduation requirements, the student will be granted the bachelor degree 
in the contract major. If completed, the contract minor will be posted on the 
academic record. 

ACADEMIC STANDARDS AND GRADES 
GRADING SYSTEM 

The grading system of the university is: 

GRADE QUALITY 
POINTS 
LEVEL OF PERFORMANCE 
A 4.0 exceptional attainment 
B+ 3.5 superior work 
B 3.0 good work 
C+ 2.5 above adequate work 
C 2.0 adequate work 
D+ 1.5 less than adequate work 
D 1.0 poor work 
F 0 failure to meet course standards 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


ACADEMIC AFFAIRS 14 ACADEMIC AFFAIRS 


GRADE POINT AVERAGE 

Grade points are earned according to the above grading scale for each credit 
attempted. Under the grading system, a student’s Grade Point Average 
(GPA) is computed by dividing the number of grade points earned by the 
number of credits attempted. The resulting number is the student’s Grade 
Point Average. 

Example: 
Grade Total Grade 
Grade points Credits points 

A 4 x3 = 12 

C 2 x3= 6 

C+ 2.5 x3 = 7.5 

F 0 x2 = 0 

Totals 8.5 x 11 25.5 

Grade Point Average Formula: 

25.5 ÷ 11 = 2.32 GPA 
total grade points divided by credits attempted = GPA points 

FORMULA FOR CALCULATING CREDIT HOURS 

The Pennsylvania Department of Education regulations indicate the 
following: One college semester credit is defined as 14 hours of classroom 
instruction. A three-credit semester based course would need to meet for 42 
hours of rigorous college classroom instruction over the semester. The 
academic requirements for hours of classroom instruction cannot be 
calculated to include exams (i.e., final exams). 

Semester courses at Mercyhurst meeting three days per week are held for 50 
minutes and those classes meeting twice per week are held for 75 minutes. 

This formula includes the expectation that students will invest 2 hours of 
preparation time for every 1 credit of course content. For the student who 
enrolls in 15 credit hours per semester, this would mean an additional 30 
hours of preparation beyond the class time. 

Laboratory courses generally award one credit hour for 3 hours of scheduled 
supervised laboratory work. Most laboratory courses are either a combined 4 
credits or have a co-requisite lab and lecture requirement. 

The Office of the Registrar monitors semester offerings for compliance. 
Similarly, semester course schedule creation is a Registrar’s Office function 
with input from academic departments. 

PASS-FAIL OPTION 

A student is permitted to declare one course on a Pass/Fail basis. The 
purpose of this option is to encourage students to explore new areas of 
study in which they are interested but have little or no background. The 
Pass/Fail option may be chosen for any course that does not fulfill the major 
or minor requirements. The Pass/Fail option requires the written approval of 
the advisor or a representative from the Office of Academic Support. A 

student must attain a minimum of a C grade to receive a Pass (PA) for the 
course. Students receiving a D+ or D grade will receive a Low Pass (LP) for 
the course. The PA or LP grades are not calculated in the grade point 
average; however, if the student fails the course, the F grade is included in 
the cumulative grade point average. 

REPEATED COURSES 

Students who earn a D+, D or F in a course may repeat that course. Courses 
that are repeated will be re-graded as PASS (PA), LOW PASS (LP) or FAIL (F). 
Students earning at least a C will be re-graded as a PASS (PA) for the course; 
students earning a D+ or D will be re-graded as a LOW PASS (LP); students 
earning an F will be re-graded as F (F). When the re-grade is PA, LP or F, the 
original grade is converted to a R (REPEAT). A LOW PASS or a PASS is not 
calculated in the GPA; however, a grade of F on the repeated course is 
calculated in the GPA. 

Students who receive a LOW PASS or a PASS for the course repeated in their 
major field must consult their department chair concerning the effect of the 
repeated course on their departmental requirements. 

ACADEMIC PROGRESS 

All students are expected and encouraged to sustain satisfactory progress in 
their studies at the university. 

Satisfactory academic progress for a full time student requires: 

1. Successful completion of a minimum of 65 percent of attempted credit 
hours in the full academic year. Financial aid may be affected by lack of 
academic progress (see section on financial aid). 
2. Earning a minimum cumulative Grade Point Average (GPA) of a 2.0. 
However, maintenance of the GPA established by the department/program 
in which the student is enrolled is also required. 
Students participating in Inter-Collegiate Athletics must maintain academic 
standards as stipulated (see section on athletics). 

ACADEMIC PROBATION AND SUSPENSION 

The GPA is used as the foundation for measuring academic progress. Should 
a student not meet the established minimum GPA standards for academic 
progress, steps will be taken to alert the student and to more closely 
monitor his or her academic performance. In addition to the minimum 
standards established for the university, some departments have more 
rigorous standards for students than the basic expectation of a 2.0. If a 
student fails to meet the minimum requirement listed below, the student 
will be placed on the appropriate Academic Probation level and receive 
notice thereof. Academic Probation places a student on notice that 
satisfactory academic progress has not occurred and that he or she is in 
jeopardy of being suspended from the university for lack of progress. 
Students placed on probation are notified of this status by mail promptly 
after the end of the semester in which performance had fallen below an 
acceptable level. Students on probation are closely monitored by their 
faculty advisors and Academic Support counselors. 

ACADEMIC PROBATION PROCESS 

Academic Warning is issued when a first time, freshman (less than 30 
credits) student’s cumulative GPA falls in the 1.75-1.99 range at the end of 
semester during their first year. This does not apply to transfer students. 
Freshman on Academic Warning will meet with an Academic Support 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


ACADEMIC AFFAIRS 15 ACADEMIC AFFAIRS 


Counselor to discuss the requirements and create an academic plan of 
action. 

Academic Probation: The first semester when a student fails to maintain 
good academic standing at the end of any semester, when a freshman 
student’s first semester cumulative GPA falls below a 1.75, or when a 
student placed on warning is unable to improve their cumulative GPA to a 

2.0 after one semester. The student will meet with an Academic Support 
Counselor to review and/or discuss an academic plan of action and the 
probation requirements. 
Academic Final Probation: Students who fail to achieve good academic 
standing at the end of their first semester on Academic Probation will be 
granted another opportunity to meet the University’s academic progress 
standards. The student will meet with an Academic Support Counselor to 
review and/or discuss an academic plan of action and the probation 
requirements. 

Academic Suspension: Suspension occurs when a student has clearly shown 
that his/ her work remains unsatisfactory, and that the minimum GPA for 
the level of attempted credits has not been achieved. Normally this occurs 
after a student has been placed on academic probation and does not make 
satisfactory academic progress during the period of probation. Initial 
suspension is for one semester. A student has the right to appeal a 
suspension; this must be done in writing to the Assistant Vice President for 
Academic Affairs. A freshman can be suspended in any semester of the first 
year if a majority of his/ her courses are not passed. The Assistant Vice 
President for Academic Affairs, after consultation with the Academic 
Support Staff, makes suspension decisions. 

Students who have been suspended from the university for one semester for 
lack of academic progress may request reinstatement to the university. 
However, they may be asked to reapply for admission. A formal letter of 
request must be sent to the Assistant Vice President for Academic Affairs 
before the beginning of the semester in which the student seeks 
readmission. If the student is permitted to return, the conditions under 
which readmission is granted will be fully indicated in a letter of 
readmission. 

Academic Dismissal: Students who have been suspended once and have 
been reinstated to the university will be placed on final probation. If the 
student continues to earn less than satisfactory academic progress, the 
student will be dismissed from the university for no less than one academic 
year. Readmission after dismissal is most unusual and only for compelling 
reasons. 

Definitions of academic progress for the award of financial aid may differ 
from academic policies. Each student should work closely with the financial 
aid office to ensure that there is an understanding of those standards and 
their implications for financial aid eligibility. 

ACADEMIC FORGIVENESS 

For the student who has not been enrolled at the university for more than 
five (5) years and who currently demonstrates the ability to do well 
academically, an Academic Forgiveness policy is available. Essentially, 
Academic Forgiveness removes the effects of earlier unsatisfactory grades 
and the cumulative GPA is reset at 0.00. 

Students who wish to be considered for Academic Forgiveness must make 
an appointment with the Registrar to determine eligibility and the impact of 
invoking the policy. Given the many dimensions of this policy and mindful of 
the fact that this policy may be applied only one time, consultation with an 
advisor is recommended. 

DEAN’S LIST AND HONORS 

The university recognizes in special ways students whose academic 
performance warrants special recognition. 

Dean’s List 

The Dean’s List is for four-year undergraduate students and is computed at 
the end of each semester. It is based on full time enrollment at Mercyhurst, 
with a minimum of 12 graded credits. Students who achieve an academic 
index of at least 3.6 for the semester will receive the posting of Dean’s List 
on their transcript the semester in which the honor is earned. Students who 
maintain Dean’s List honors for an entire academic year will be invited to 
attend an event held by the Office of the Provost during the fall semester. 

Graduation with Latin Honors 

A student is graduated with Latin honors from Mercyhurst University if he/ 
she has achieved one of the following levels in his/her academic index: 

3.90 GPA — Summa cum laude 
3.75 GPA — Magna cum laude 
3.60 GPA — Cum laude 
Students who are enrolled in and fulfill the obligations of the Mercyhurst 
Honors Program (including the successful completion of 8 Honors identified 
courses) graduate with Mercyhurst Honors. In addition, these and other 
students graduate with Latin Honors if they have achieved one of the above 
levels in their academic index. 

GRADUATION AWARDS 

To be considered for a graduation award, a student must complete all 
coursework by the date of commencement, including student-teaching, 
internships and externships. Candidates for non-divisional/departmental 
awards must be cleared by the Registrar’s Office as having no more than one 
year of transfer credit counting toward the graduation requirement of 121 
credits. Candidates must also be cleared by the Student Conduct Office as 
having no serious or recent discipline issues. Full-time faculty, staff and 
administrators nominate students for the top awards of the university and 
divisional/departmental faculty nominate students for divisional awards. 
The President’s Senior Awards Committee reviews all nominations and 
makes the final selection. Winners are presented with their award during 
graduation weekend. 

Carpe Diem Award 

This award is the highest student award given to a traditional student. It is 
given in recognition of intellectual competency, personal integrity and most 
importantly, leadership impact. It is presented to the outstanding senior 
who has made the most positive impact on the life of the Mercyhurst 
community and who best exemplifies the university motto, “Carpe Diem” – 
“Seize the Day.” The student who wins this award will also be the student 
speaker at the graduation ceremony. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


ACADEMIC AFFAIRS 16 ACADEMIC AFFAIRS 


Bishop’s Award for Academic Excellence 

This undergraduate award is presented to the graduating senior who is 
considered the top scholar among the graduating class. Criteria for selection 
are GPA and program demands. The rigor associated with dual majors and 
minors is also considered. The Registrar’s Office will provide the President’s 
Selection Committee with the names of the students receiving the top five 
highest cumulative GPAs. The President’s Selection Committee will then 
choose the winner based on these criteria. A cash award is presented by the 
Catholic Diocese of Erie. 

Sister Carolyn Herrmann Service Award 

This award is given to a traditional graduating senior who has given 
unselfishly of time, energy, loyalty and talent in the spirit of Sr. Carolyn 
Herrmann, who served as the university’s president from 1962 to 1970. 

Frank Barry Leadership Award 

This award is given to a traditional graduating senior who has exemplified 
superior student leadership and campus involvement during his/her time at 
Mercyhurst University. This award is named after Frank Barry ’75, one of the 
first male student government presidents. 

Mother Borgia Egan Honors Award 

This undergraduate award recognizes the model honors student who fully 
embodies the spirit of a liberal arts education. The winner must have 
completed the requirements of the Honors Program. The winner also will 
have demonstrated the following: an appreciation of the cultural 
environment of the university, academic and scholarly/professional 
accomplishments, and a dedication to community service. 

Alumni Recognition Award 

This traditional undergraduate award is presented to the graduating senior 
who has shown exceptional loyalty and strong ties to his/her alma mater, 
and whose undergraduate days have been filled with a visible love, spirit 
and involvement at The Hurst. 

President’s Award for Excellence in the Academic Colleges 

Each of the four colleges at the university, under the direction and guidance 
of the respective dean, nominate three traditional seniors in their respective 
colleges. The criteria for selection are GPA and overall contribution to the 
respective college. The award is given to the student who is considered to be 
the top scholar in each respective college. 

Catherine McAuley Adult Student Award 

This award is presented to an adult student in recognition of superior work, 
as well as personal and professional achievement. The non-traditional 
student who wins this award will be the student who has been judged to be 
the most outstanding adult student in the graduating class. The award is 
based on GPA, but also takes into account professional achievement, family 
responsibilities and other challenges that can face adult students. 

President’s Award for Adult Excellence 

Under the direction and guidance of the deans, each college nominates an 
adult student for this award. The criteria for selection are GPA and overall 
contribution to the university. The award is given to one adult student who 
is considered to be a top scholar at the university. 

Sister Eustace Taylor Graduate Student Award 

Each of the seven graduate programs, under the direction and guidance of 
the program director, select the graduate student in their respective 
program for this award. The criteria for selection are GPA and overall 
contribution to the respective college. 

NATIONAL HONOR SOCIETIES 

Mercyhurst has active societies honoring those outstanding students who 
possess the ideals of the honor society. 

ALPHA PHI SIGMA: National criminal justice honor society 
ALPHA SIGMA LAMBDA: Adult honor society 
BETA BETA BETA: Biology honor society 
DELTA MU DELTA: National honor society in business 
ETA SIGMA DELTA: International hospitality/tourism honor society 
KAPPA DELTA PI: National honor society, Education 
LAMBDA PI ETA: National honor society, Communication 
NU DELTA ALPHA: National honor society, Dance 
PHI ALPHA THETA: History national honor society 
PHI ETA SlGMA: Freshman national honor society 
PHI SlGMA IOTA: International Foreign Languages honor society 
PI SlGMA ALPHA: National honor society, Political Science 
PSI CHI: National honor society, Psychology 
SIGMA PI SIGMA: National honor society, Physics 
SIGMA TAU DELTA: This national honor society confers distinction for high 
academic achievement in English language and literature in undergraduate, 
graduate, and professional studies. 

KAPPA GAMMA Pl: National Catholic honor society makes leadership a more 
tangible reality and pledges to do greater things for its students in the 
future. Kappa Gamma Pi provides the St. Catherine Medal, which is given to 
the young woman who has performed some specific outstanding service or 
has the best record of progressive achievement. The award is endowed by 
Margaret Anne Mooney Emling, class of 1937, in memory of her sister, 
Catherine Mooney. It is normally awarded to a sophomore. 

ACADEMIC POLICIES AND PROCEDURES 
BASIC COMPETENCIES REQUIREMENTS 

Students admitted to Mercyhurst University are expected to have requisite 
competence in reading, writing, and mathematics. Entering students will 
work with their a dvisors to select courses that are appropriate to the 
student’s educational background and course of study. Should a student be 
found lacking in skills to complete university courses successfully, 
developmental courses are available. These offerings are described below. 

Mathematics Competency 

Students who score below the required SAT mathematics score must 
successfully complete MATH 099 (Basic Mathematics) and/or MATH 102 
(Elementary Algebra) before the end of their first year. 

Writing Competency/Reading Competency 

The university may recommend or require a student to take a 
developmental reading or writing course after evaluation of the student’s 
SAT and/or ACT scores (verbal). 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


ACADEMIC AFFAIRS 17 ACADEMIC AFFAIRS 


Note: These basic courses (ENG 098 and Math 099) carry three elective 
credits; however, the credits do not count toward graduation and are 
subject to regular tuition. 

Students transferring to Mercyhurst will not be held responsible for the 
Basic Competency Requirement if they have successfully completed a course 
equivalent to University Composition and/or Basic Mathematics and/or 
Elementary Algebra with a 2.0 minimum grade. However, all REACH liberal 
arts requirements must still be met. 

REGISTRATION 

The registration process begins with a conference between students and 
their advisors. The official registration period for each new semester usually 
begins in the last month of the previous semester. No student will be 
registered without the advisor’s online registration approval or signature; 
nor will any registrations be accepted after the official ending of the 
registration period without approval of the Office of the Provost. 

AUDIT 

Students who audit a course do so without working for, or expecting to 
receive, formal university credit. Students may audit undergraduate courses; 
however, laboratory courses may not be taken as audit. A student may not 
change the audit course to credit (or a credit course to audit) after the 
Drop/Add period. Audit will be recorded on student transcripts as AU, which 
grade carries neither credit nor quality points. Permission of the instructor is 
required in order to register for the course. 

SCHEDULE CHANGES 

Students may change their schedules during the designated Add/Drop 
period. All schedule changes processed by the Registrar’s Office must have 
the signed approval of the student’s faculty advisor. 

STUDENT RECORDS POLICY 

TRANSCRIPTS 

An “official” transcript is one bearing the Mercyhurst University seal and the 
signature of the Registrar and is issued only upon the written authorization 
of the student. Official transcripts are normally mailed directly to other 
institutions and agencies or released directly to the student in a sealed 
envelope. A fee of $5 is charged for the issuance of each official transcript. 
An “unofficial” transcript does not bear the seal of the university nor the 
authorized signature. These are issued free of charge to the student upon 
request. 

Students and alumni may obtain a transcript (either official or unofficial) by 
stopping in at the Office of the Registrar, Main 106, during regular office 
hours and completing a transcript request form or by accessing the 
University website at https://www.mercyhurst.edu/academics/registrarsoffice 
where instructions for downloading and completing the form are 
located. 

FERPA 

The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974 (FERPA) requires that 
all students and/or former students must provide written authorization for 
the release of their educational records to a third party. FERPA also affords 
students certain rights regarding review of their records. Complete 
information on FERPA can be found at mercyhurst.ferpa.edu. 

EXCEPTIONS TO REGULATIONS/MISSED DEADLINES 

Students who miss deadlines (drop/add, pass/fail, withdrawal, incomplete, 
etc.) and ask for an exception are required to obtain the written permission 
of the Office of the Provost. These requests will be kept on file and will 
become part of the record for future decisions on requests for exceptions. 
Exceptions to the regulations for serious reasons and waivers on deadlines 
will only be granted where valid documentation is provided. 

CLASS ATTENDANCE 

Every instructor will define, within the first week of the course, all factors on 
which the course grade is based. If classroom attendance is to be considered 
in calculating the course grade, students will be notified of this ahead of 
time, and a statement to this effect should be included on the course 
syllabus. Freshmen are required to attend class, and every faculty member, 
therefore, should indicate on the course syllabus the nature of the penalty 
for nonattendance. 

COURSE EXAMINATION 

The academic calendar of the university provides for final examination 
periods in each semester. Faculty members are expected to provide an initial 
evaluation of student progress and notify the Academic Support Office by 
mid-term for all students in their class. All faculty are expected to give final 
examinations on the officially designated examination days. Any deviation 
from the official schedule must be approved by the department chair and 
the Provost. Faculty members may not give exams early or waive the final 
exam without the expressed consent of the department chair and the 
Provost, and then only under unusual circumstances. 

COURSE WITHDRAWAL 

Students who withdraw from a course after the first week will receive a 
grade of “W” for the course. There will be no withdrawal after the published 
last to withdraw date in any semester. Students need to be aware that 
withdrawing from one or more courses can affect Academic Progress 
resulting in the loss of Financial Aid. 

* See Student Financial Services information for details. 
VOLUNTARY WITHDRAWAL (Cease Enrollment) FROM THE 
UNIVERSITY 

Students who wish to withdraw officially from the University must complete 
the cease enrollment form, available in the Office of the Provost. Students 
may withdraw from the university without grade penalty until the last day 
of regular classes, but before final exams, in any semester. Tuition refunds 
will be calculated based on University policy. See TUITION AND FEE REFUND 
POLICY DUE TO TOTAL WITHDRAWAL. Students who have officially 
withdrawn and are in good academic standing may apply to the Office of 
Admissions for readmission during the next regularly scheduled semester or 
session. 

TAKING A COURSE OFF-CAMPUS 

For students enrolled at Mercyhurst, written permission must be obtained 
before taking courses at another accredited institution for transfer back to 
Mercyhurst. Full approval, including the submission of the off-campus 
course approval form, to the Registrar must occur prior to enrolling in a 
course. Continuing students are not permitted to take more than six credits 
per academic year at another institution. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


ACADEMIC AFFAIRS 18 ACADEMIC AFFAIRS 


COURSE 
OVERLOAD 


Freshmen are not permitted to take more than 18 credits per semester. Any 
exceptions to this rule must be approved by the Office of the Provost. 
Sophomores, juniors and seniors need approval from either their academic 
advisor or academic counselor in order to take more than 18 credits per 
semester, and the Office of the Provost must approve registration for 21 or 
more credits per semester. Typically, only students who maintain a 3.0 GPA 
for two consecutive semesters will be granted permission to take 21 or more 
credits per semester. Students should also consult with the Student 
Financial Services Office before attempting to register for more than 18 
credits. 

INCOMPLETE GRADES 

The Incomplete Grade (I) is a temporary grade indicating that work in the 
course was acceptable, though a significant or critical part of it was not 
completed due to illness or other serious circumstances beyond the 
student’s control. It is the student’s responsibility to verify these conditions. 
The “I” grade may not be used to extend time for course work or for the 
convenience of the student or faculty member. Incomplete coursework must 
be submitted to the instructor no later than 30 days after the end of the 
semester in which the “I” is given. If not completed, the “I” grade is changed 
to a grade of F. 

Students who are working on special projects that carry into other semesters 
or on theses should not register for credit until the semester when 
completion appears likely. While on the transcript, I grades will carry no 
academic penalty. 

STUDENT GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES 

Mercyhurst University believes that disputes or problems should be 
discussed openly; the facts presented and fairly considered to settle the 
matter efficiently. 

Differences are usually best resolved amicably and informally through 
effective communication. If a student has an academic concern related to a 
course, faculty member, or program, it is best to go to the professor first for 
resolution. The student can also ask for assistance from their academic or 
faculty advisor. If these initial attempts to resolve the dispute are not 
effective, the student should bring the issue to the department chair. If the 
student is not satisfied with the outcome at the level of the department 
chair, the process would be to go to the associate dean and/or dean of their 
college. If the dean or associate dean is unable to resolve the issue to the 
student’s satisfaction, the student should bring the issue to the Office of the 
Provost. In cases where the student is not comfortable going to the 
department chair, associate dean or dean, they may bring the issue directly 
to the Office of the Provost. 

All oral and/or written materials presented for mediation under this policy 
will be treated in a way that recognizes the importance of confidentiality 
and privacy, while also allowing for proper resolution of the issue. 

Students who wish to file a grievance involving any employee of Mercyhurst 
University are directed to contact the appropriate department director. If the 
grievance involves the director, the student may contact an administrator 
within the respective area. All grievances will be addressed within a 
reasonable timeframe with notification provided to the student and other 
involved parties. 

Grievances involving concerns of illegal discrimination or harassment would 
be handled according to the non-discrimination policies and procedures. 
Mercyhurst University encourages those who have experienced any form of 
sex discrimination to report the incident promptly and to seek all available 
assistance. Mercyhurst University takes complaints very seriously and will 
work with complainants to ensure their safety and to remedy the 
situation. An individual may file a complaint alleging a violation of Title IX 
against any Mercyhurst student, Mercyhurst employee or third 
party. Complaints may include claims of sex discrimination, sexual 
harassment, sexual assault, or any other forms of sexual misconduct against 
the complainant or against others. The complainant may choose to file a 
criminal complaint with the appropriate local or state authorities. Please 
contact the Title IX Coordinator, Alice Agnew, 301 Old Main, 
aagnew@mercyhurst.edu, to file a complaint of sex discrimination. The 
Sexual Misconduct Policy and grievance procedures are available in the 
Student Handbook. 

GRADE APPEALS 

In all cases it shall be assumed that the grade assigned is correct; the 
student appealing the grade must justify the need for a change of the grade 
assigned. A grade may only be appealed if the final grade issued for a class 
does not reflect what the student has earned according to the grading 
criteria outlined by the course instructor. Grade appeals may not be based 
upon a request to have submitted work re-evaluated by the instructor. An 
appeal must be initiated within 45 days after the close of the semester in 
which the grade was earned (or 45 days into the fall semester for grades 
issued during the previous spring semester). 

If a student believes that a final grade issued is not reflective of the grading 
criteria outlined by the course instructor he/she should first meet with the 
instructor to discuss the final grade. If this meeting does not resolve the 
issue, a formal grade appeal may be submitted through the Office of the 
Provost for review by the appropriate college dean. This is a formal appeal 
and should be submitted as such. The document should be prepared using a 
word processing application and should be concise. The appeal should 
include all pertinent facts and should clearly state the basis on which the 
student is making the appeal. A copy of the course syllabus and copies of all 
relative assignments and exams should be attached to the appeal. 

Once the appeal has been received the instructor involved will be informed 
of the grade appeal and must submit a written statement in response. After 
considering both statements, the college dean will make a recommendation 
to the provost, who will make the final decision. The Office of the Provost 
will notify both the student and instructor of the final decision. 

ACADEMIC HONESTY 

Students are expected to contribute actively to the development of an 
atmosphere of academic integrity. Mercyhurst University assumes, 
therefore, that students will not resort to plagiarism or any other form of 
academic dishonesty. Students who engage in willful academic dishonesty 
may be subject to a broad range of sanctions. At the discretion of their 
instructor, they may be required to redo the plagiarized assignment, or they 
may receive an automatic F for the exam/assignment and/ or course. 
Students found to be in collaboration with other students involved in willful 
academic dishonesty are also subject to disciplinary action. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


ACADEMIC AFFAIRS 19 ACADEMIC AFFAIRS 


With reference to class assignments: 

Academic integrity is an extremely important virtue in students and it is to 
be maintained in class assignments. Students should follow the directions 
given by faculty members about assignments. Assignments should be read 
in full. Students are expected to do their own work; students are not 
permitted to submit work partially or totally done by another student or 
documents downloaded from the internet. Use of computer-assisted 
translation on assignments to be submitted in a language other than 
English is likewise prohibited. Group work is permitted only when a 
collaborative effort is assigned; only those who actually worked on the 
assignment should have their names on the submission. 

With reference to citations in formal writing: 

Students are expected to uphold generally recognized standards of citation 
in order to avoid plagiarism. Though individual instructors may alter the 
expectations somewhat, general principles include: the necessity to provide 
citations for any direct quotation, the need to provide citations for any 
paraphrased material, the need to credit theories or concepts to their 
authors through citation, and the need to provide full and accurate citations. 
Mercyhurst University considers acts of forgery on academic documents to 
constitute academic dishonesty. 

With reference to taking exams: 

It is expected that Mercyhurst University students will exhibit academic 
honesty when they take exams. Failure to do so is a form of deception that is 
unacceptable at Mercyhurst. Any action that misrepresents the extent to 
which a student has mastered material assessed on an exam constitutes 
academic dishonesty or cheating. Cheating includes, but is not limited to the 
following types of activities: copying from another student’s test or 
assignment or allowing another student to copy from your test or 
assignment; collaborating during a test with any person without explicit 
faculty permission; stealing, buying or otherwise improperly obtaining all or 
part of a test before the exam; taking a test for someone else or allowing 
someone else to take a test for you; altering responses after an assignment 
or test was graded; and marking two answers on a test, so that the choice is 
unclear hoping that the teacher will assume a correct response was 
intended. 

When an instructor believes that a student has committed an act of 
academic dishonesty, the instructor will inform the student and may 
complete an Academic Dishonesty Report to be filed with the Office of the 
Provost. On a first offense, the student will be subject to the consequence 
determined by the individual faculty member. On a second offense, the 
student will be subject to the consequence determined by the individual 
faculty member, as well as any combination of the following as determined 
by the Office of the Provost: 

• assignment of community service hours 
• requirement of additional academic courses 
• requirement to complete a tutorial program of remediation 
• exclusion from participating in student organizations and extracurricular 
activities, including athletics 
• expulsion from the Honors Program or other university-organized honor 
societies 
• revocation of scholarships granted for academic performance 
• suspension from the university 
• dismissal from the university 
Students have a right to appeal if they believe an academic dishonesty 
allegation is unfounded. A written appeal must be submitted to the Office of 
the Provost within 30 days of receiving notice regarding the allegation. 
Appeals will be heard by the Vice President of Academic Affairs or his/her 
designee. The final determination in any academic dishonesty case lies with 
the Vice President of Academic Affairs. Questions regarding academic 
dishonesty or the appeal process should be directed to the Office of the 
Provost. 

SECURITY VIOLATIONS AND MISUSE OF COMPUTER RESOURCES 

Mercyhurst University reserves the right to take serious action against any 
student who willfully releases restricted computer information; misuses the 
university’s computer resources and/or violates the code of conduct for use 
of information technology. Such action may include (but is not limited to) 
the cancellation of computer privileges, immediate dismissal from work 
positions if applicable, academic suspension or dismissal (to be determined 
by the Office of the Provost), and/or criminal prosecution. 

With reference to library conduct: reading and audio-visual materials 
provided for the enrichment of the university community should be treated 
with respect by all students. Willful destruction of library materials, 
including but not limited to books, periodicals, manuscripts, CDs, videos and 
records constitutes academic misconduct. 

INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD 

Research involving human participants must be conducted in compliance 
with federal guidelines. Students engaged in such research must receive 
approval from the Institutional Review Board (IRB). 

INDEPENDENT STUDY 

Independent Study courses are reserved for students who have achieved a 
minimum of 70 credits, who have had substantial experience, a cumulative 
GPA of 2.5 in the chosen area of study, and who wish to pursue a specialized 
topic not offered in the regular program. Students enrolled in Independent 
Study courses must meet with the sponsoring faculty member at least one 
hour weekly during the semester. Students who wish to study 
independently must first secure the approval of the department directors, 
their advisors, and faculty sponsors. A formal plan of study must then be 
filed with the Office of the Provost for final approval. Independent Study 
courses are taken only on a Pass-Fail basis unless the course is a major or 
minor requirement. Special applications for enrolling in Independent Study 
courses are available in the Office of the Provost. Students cannot register 
for Independent Study until their applications have been approved. 

TUTORIAL STUDY 

Tutorial study is available only to students who have completed a minimum 
of 60 credits and cannot enroll in the regularly scheduled course. Tutorial 
courses differ from Independent Study courses in that they are a part of the 
regular program and require no more special knowledge than that expected 
of students enrolled in a regular semester course. Students who enroll in a 
tutorial course must meet the same requirements as those enrolled in the 
regular course, except that they must meet with the instructor two hours 
weekly during the semester. Because there are fewer contact hours with the 
instructor, students whose Grade Point Average is below 2.5 are not 
permitted to enroll in tutorial courses. Permission to enroll in tutorial 
courses is reserved for students who are completing a program or who are 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


ACADEMIC AFFAIRS 
20 ACADEMIC AFFAIRS 


meeting other requirements. It is expected that tutorial courses will not be 
taken simply as a matter of student convenience or preference. Under most 
circumstances a student may only enroll in two such courses during their 
period of matriculation. The application for tutorial study form is available in 
the Office of the Provost and must be approved by the Office of the Provost 
once written permission of the department chair, the faculty advisor, and 
the sponsoring faculty member have been obtained. Tutorial courses are 
graded on a Pass-Fail basis unless the course is a major or minor 
requirement. Students may not begin the course work until the tutorial 
application has been approved and registered. 

EXAMINATION CREDIT 

1. 
Advanced Placement (AP) Credit earned from high school prior to 
entering Mercyhurst University: for course equivalency and credit to be 
awarded, students must earn a score of 4 or above on the AP Exam; 
2. 
International Baccalaureate (IB) examinations: for course 
equivalency and credit to be awarded students must earn a score of 5 
or above on the standard exam and a score of 4 or above on the higher 
level exam; 
3. 
College Level Examination Program (CLEP): for course 
equivalency and credit to be awarded, a minimum score equivalent to 
a “C” as determined by the Academic Department is required to award 
credit for a CLEP exam. Current CLEP exams accepted by the university 
are: 
CLEP Exam Course Course Title Cred 
Min 
Score 

INTRODUCTORY BADM-310 BUSINESS LAW 3.00 50 
BUSINESS LAW I 
MACROECONOMICS ECON-105 MACROECONO 3.00 56 

MICS 
INTRO EDUC-302 EDUCATIONAL 3.00 50 
EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY 
PSYCHOLOGY 
COLLEGE ENG-110 COMPOSITION 3.00 50 
COMPOSITION 
COLLEGE COMP ENG-120 RESEARCH & 3.00 50 
MODULAR WRITING 
FRENCH LANGUAGE FREN-102 INTRODUCTION 3.00 50 
I TO FRENCH II 
FRENCH LANGUAGE FREN-204 INTERMEDIATE 3.00 62 
II FRENCH II 
HISTORY OF THE HIS-101 US HISTORY TO 3.00 60 
UNITED STATES I 1865 
HISTORY OF THE US HIS-102 US HISTORY 3.00 50 
II SINCE 1865 
WESTERN CIV II HIS-146 EUROPEAN 3.00 50 
1648 TO PRES HIST SINCE 

RENAISSANCE 
WEST CIVILIZATION HIS-170 WORLD HIS I: 3.00 50 
I AGRICULT TO 

ZHENG HE 

COLLEGE ALGEBRA MATH-108 
MATHEMATICA 3.00 50 
L PROBLEM 
SOLVING 

COLLEGE MATH MATH-108 
MATHEMATICA 3.00 50 
L PROBLEM 

SOLVING 
CALCULUS EXAM MATH-170 CALCULUS I 4.00 55 
PRINCIPLES OF MGMTPRINCIPLES 
OF 3.00 50 
MANAGEMENT 120 MANAGEMENT 
INFORM SYSTEMS & MIS-110 ADVANCED 3.00 50 
COMP APPL COMPUTER 
APPLICATIONS 
PRINCIPLES OF MKTG-162 PRINCIPLES OF 3.00 56 
MARKETING INTEGRATED 
MARKETING 
AMERICAN POLI-100 AMERICAN 3.00 63 
GOVERNMENT GOVERNMENT 
INTRODUCTORY SOC-100 INTRODUCTION 3.00 50 
SOCIOLOGY TO SOCIOLOGY 
HUMAN GROWTH SOC-108 HUMAN 3.00 50 
AND DEVELOPMENT GROWTH AND 
DEVELOPMENT 
SPANISH SPAN-102 INTRODUCTION 3.00 50 
LANGUAGE, LEVEL 1 TO SPANISH II 
SPANISH SPAN-204 INTERMEDIATE 3.00 66 
LANGUAGE SPANISH II 
ANALYZING & THUM-999 HUMANITIES/LI 3.00 50 
INTERPRETING LIT TERATURE 
BIOLOGY EXAM TSCI-998 NATURAL 4.00 50 
SCIENCE & LAB 

4. 
Challenge Exams (ordinarily provided by the Academic Department) 
Notes: 

a) 
AP, CLEP or a comprehensive course examination may not be used by a 
student to challenge a grade in a course taken at Mercyhurst 
University. Only by repeating the course may a student remediate a 
grade. 

b) Ordinarily, credit received through CLEP or AP is applied to satisfy 
REACH or elective requirements. 
c) All credit received through proficiency exams appear on the student 
transcript as PASS. Failure will not be recorded on the transcript. 

CLASS STANDING AND STUDENT STATUS 
CLASS STANDING Class standing is dissociated from graduation 
requirements. For purposes related to academic study, a student with 0-29 
credits is considered a freshman; 30-59 credits is a sophomore; 60-89 credits 
is a junior; and 90 or more credits is a senior. 

FULL-TIME STUDENT STATUS 

Mercyhurst University considers a full-time student to be one who carries at 
least 24 credit hours per academic year and who carries a minimum of 
twelve credit hours in any regular semester. Students who receive financial 
aid or government-sponsored loans should consult with the Office of 
Student Financial Services before registering for fewer than 12 credits in any 
semester. 

PART-TIME STUDENT STATUS 

A part-time student is one who is officially registered at the university but 
carries fewer than 24 hours during the normal academic year or who carries 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


ACADEMIC AFFAIRS 21 ACADEMIC AFFAIRS 


fewer than 12 credit hours in any regular semester. A part-time 
matriculated student is charged at a per-credit rate, plus additional fees as 
determined by the Vice President of Finance. 

SUMMER ENROLLMENT 

Mercyhurst University limits the number of credits students may register for 
the summer semester. Students who are registered for 6 credits in the 
summer semester (any combination of summer sessions) are considered 
full-time and reported to the National Student Clearing House as such. 

SPECIAL STUDENTS 

Non-matriculated students are permitted to attend classes if they have been 
approved by the Office of the Provost. The usual policy is to permit a 
maximum of 12 credits to be taken before a student must make application 
for admission. The credits are then transferred to the matriculated status. 
High school students who wish to attend classes under the dual enrollment 
program must be approved by the Office of the Provost. Students may take 
no more than two classes per semester. No high school student may take 
more than 30 credits before matriculating at the university. 

OFFICE OF ACADEMIC SUPPORT & STUDENT SUCCESS 
Mission 

The Office of Academic Support and Student Success partners with students 
and faculty to enhance the academic experience. The office is committed to 
collaborative engagement within the campus community in an effort to 
improve student success and retention. 

Services 

The Office of Academic Support & Student Success is the “go to” office for 
students at Mercyhurst University. The office understands that successful 
students are those who are engaged in, are satisfied with, and are 
integrated into the university community. 

Mercyhurst has a unique dual advising system. Each student is assigned an 
academic counselor as well as a faculty advisor. Academic counselors work 
with students, faculty and university administrators to ensure a positive 
experience for all members of our community. They can assist students with 
most issues they may encounter, such as: 

• Implementing academic success strategies and plans 
• Navigating the college environment 
• Exploring interest areas and majors 
• Finding a peer tutor 
• Understanding the REACH liberal arts curriculum 
• Addressing academic performance concerns 
• Making sense of academic procedures and policies 
• Connecting with other campus resources 
Academic counselors are available for walk-in visits as well as appointments 
during their office hours, 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. The office is located on the 
first floor of Egan Hall. 

Student success is a top priority at Mercyhurst. The Office of Academic 
Support oversees academic services for students to achieve that success. 

TUTORING CENTER 

The Tutoring Center offers one-on-one or small group tutoring in most 
subject areas. Tutors are current students who have demonstrated mastery 
over the content area. All tutors are recommended or approved by the 
faculty at Mercyhurst and maintain a high cumulative grade point average. 
Students seeking tutoring can request a tutor through the Tutoring Center’s 
page on the my.mercyhurst Portal: 

https://portal.mercyhurst.edu/Academics/AcademicSupport/ 
Tutoring/Pages/default.aspx. 

THE WRITING CENTER 

Located in the Hammermill Library, Room 205, the Writing Center is staffed 
with tutors to help students at any stage in the writing process, including 
analyzing and understanding the assignment; revising and editing a rough 
draft; using correct citation styles ( MLA, APA or Chicago style); and 
incorporating professors’ suggestions about draft. 

Students may bring in writing projects for any class. To meet with a tutor, 
students sign up on the schedule outside of the Writing Center door, where 
the usual hours are posted each semester. An appointment is for thirty 
minutes, and there is a printer to use for drafts. 

LEARNING DIFFERENCES PROGRAM 

The Learning Differences Program provides reasonable accommodations to 
qualified students in compliance with Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act 
of 1973, and Title III of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. There are 
two levels of service: Level 1 services are offered to all qualified students, 
free of charge, and include academic adjustments such as testing 
accommodations and assistive technology. Level 2 is a fee-based program 
that extends those services mandated by law to also include a pre-college 
August program, academic counseling and progress reports, supplemental 
notes and priority registration. 

Additionally, students with documented chronic medical needs receive 
accommodations through this office. This includes sensory disabilities, 
physical disabilities, and students identified with hidden disabilities 
(impairments not readily apparent to others) such as chronic health 
conditions and traumatic brain injury. Our mission is to identify and reduce 
physical, programmatic and attitudinal barriers in collaboration with 
faculty, staff and administrators so that students’ opportunities for 
achievement may be equalized while supporting academic integrity. 

The Learning Differences program has been continually advertised and 
commended by Princeton Review’s The K&W Guide and Peterson’s Guide to 
Programs for Students with Learning Disabilities. The most recent Best 
Colleges Online listing of “20 Incredible Colleges for Special Needs Students” 
placed Mercyhurst’s Learning Difference Program ninth among the top 
programs nationwide. 

AUTISM INITIATIVE AT MERCYHURST (AIM) 

In 2008, Mercyhurst introduced a program to meet the needs of the growing 
population of university students who have been diagnosed with Asperger’s 
syndrome and high-functioning autism. This program focuses on building a 
foundation for self-advocacy, social skills, and sound academic progress. 
Recognizing the role that parents of students diagnosed with Asperger’s 
syndrome have held in their student’s lives, families are consulted when 
appropriate in matters of concern. Students interact with a qualified staff of 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


ACADEMIC AFFAIRS 
22 ACADEMIC AFFAIRS 


professionals from throughout our campus and receive a full complement of 
social and educational services. This program also includes access to all of 
the accommodations that students qualify for under Section 504 of the 
Rehabilitation Act of 1973. 

The Autism Initiative at Mercyhurst equally emphasizes academic and social 
competence. AIM students need help in developing campus competencies, 
knowing how to navigate the library, cafeteria and classroom. The goal for 
students is to develop their academic and social niche, demonstrate 
proficiency in their academic core area, and experience an overall sense of 
satisfaction with their Mercyhurst University experience. 

In addition to the academic accommodations through the Learning 
Differences Program, students in AIM receive social support. Included 
activities are participation in Asperger Advisory group, peer mentoring 
program, priority for single room residence hall, social events and 
participation in Autism Awareness Month activities. A unique residential 
support program is available to students giving them the option of residing 
in a living learning community in order to practice needed life skills 
appropriate in the residence hall. 

Students in AIM pay an additional fee for these services. Space is limited. 
Early application is suggested. Admission to Mercyhurst University, 
however, does not guarantee admission to the AIM program. 

HONORS PROGRAM 

The Mercyhurst University Honors Program is a sophomore-through senior-
year experience, which provides enhanced college experiences to the 
promising and talented student. Honors students take challenging academic 
courses and complete an intellectual or creative capstone project. Honors 
students are able to take part in a variety of intellectual, artistic, service, and 
community-building events organized by the student-run Honors Council. 

The program seeks to enrich the educational experience of such students by 
offering a curriculum of unusually challenging courses in which discussion is 
emphasized and in which a deeper understanding of the course material is 
the aim. Honors students must take no less than eight (8) honors courses. 
Of these eight courses, three (3) may be honors contract courses (exceptions 
to the amount of courses and/or the amount of contract courses may be 
allowed with the approval of the Honors Director). Honors courses are 
seminar-style courses that are either the catalog equivalent of courses 
required for the REACH Curriculum or original and unique courses offered by 
the Honors Program and various academic departments. Honors students 
may also create an honors contract for a course that is not offered 
specifically as an Honors class to receive Honors credit for that class. The 
Honors curriculum is designed so that six of the eight required courses may 
be used to fulfill the university’s REACH Curriculum. It is possible for an 
honors student to fulfill the eight-course requirement solely with REACH 
courses. The capstone experience for the Honors student is the Honors 
Capstone Project. Honors students, working with a full-time faculty 
member, create a research, investigative, service or creative project as the 
student’s honors capstone experience. The results or product of the project 
must be presented by the student publically in a venue appropriate to the 
project. 

Academically excellent students may be invited to participate in the Honors 
Preparation Year (HPY) as first-year students. HPY students participate in 

Honors Program courses and activities as they prepare to apply for 
admission to the Honors Program. Students in the HPY are selected on the 
basis of high school performance, SAT or ACT scores, a sample of scholarly 
writing, and a personal statement. Superior transfer students are 
encouraged to request permission to enter the program. 

In order to graduate with University Honors, students must complete the 
required amount of Honors courses, achieve a GPA of at least 3.5, complete 
the extracurricular requirements as detailed in Honors Program literature, 
and publically present the results or product of their Honors Capstone 
Project. Any exceptions to these requirements must be documented and 
approved by the Honors Program Director and submitted to the Registrar’s 
Office prior to the start of the student’s final semester. 

OFF-CAMPUS LEARNING EXPERIENCE 

Off-campus learning experience is that mode which results from non-
classroom experiences such as student teaching, internships, independent 
studies off-campus and approved travel-study tours. It is recognized that, 
because off-campus learning is a valuable and desirable supplement to the 
more structured theoretical learning of the classroom setting, formal 
academic credit may be selectively awarded only if all the following 
conditions are fulfilled: 

1. 
That all learning experiences are directly related to an existing 
curriculum area at Mercyhurst and that they embody the essential 
principles and practices formally taught in that area; 
2. 
That the learning experiences are of sufficient length to provide 
significant and realistic experience (a minimum of 200 hours but no 
more than 275 hours are required to receive 3 credits); 
3. 
That the learning experiences reflect an active participatory rather 
than a passive observatory role (75 percent of the total hours 
accumulated must be in an active participatory role); that the intern(s) 
and faculty member(s) directing the learning experience 
communicate in the best way possible (e.g., personal conference, 
seminar, written report) on at least a bi-monthly basis, which may be 
included in the minimum hours required; 
4. 
That the student must file and have approved a written application 
with the appropriate faculty member, department director, and the 
Office of Academic Affairs prior to the field-based experience to receive 
credit. The intern must be formally evaluated during the learning 
experience by a faculty member. Written evidence of regular 
evaluation by the immediate supervisor (e.g., cooperating teacher, 
internship coordinator) must be shown; 
5. 
That the student is required to present a critique of the learning 
experience in the form of a paper to the faculty member(s) or an oral 
presentation to a relevant class; 
6. 
That the faculty member who is directing the off-campus experience 
and the supervisor who is commenting on the specific strengths and 
weaknesses develop a written evaluation and place it in the student’s 
senior placement file in the Career Development Center; 
7. 
That students receiving off-campus learning experience credit pay the 
published rate; 
8. 
That off-campus learning experience courses are considered part of 
the 45 credits (excluding laboratory credits taken in conjunction with a 
course) in a major program only when such experience is required by 
the department; 
2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


ACADEMIC AFFAIRS 
23 ACADEMIC AFFAIRS 


9. 
That no more than 12 credit hours in off-campus learning experiences 
are granted to any student unless specifically approved by the 
internship director and the Office for Academic Affairs; 
10. 
That off-campus learning experience courses are used to meet core 
requirements only upon approval of the department director and the 
Office of Academic Affairs; 
11. 
The basis for grading off-campus learning experience courses is left to 
the discretion of the individual department and/or the internship 
director; 
12. 
In cases such as exchange programs where program guidelines are 
dictated by another institution, Mercyhurst students will be exempted 
from the regulations concerning off-campus learning experiences with 
the consent of the appropriate faculty members, the department 
director, and the Office for Academic Affairs. Off-campus learning 
experiences are graded on a Pass-Fail basis. 
INTERNSHIP PROGRAMS 

In nearly every academic major, students can apply concepts learned in the 
classroom at an appropriate company/organization where qualified 
placements have been established. For every three credits of internship that 
students are registered, they must complete a minimum of 200 hours in the 
field. Depending on the major, students can earn up to 12 undergraduate 
academic credits of internship. 

Recent surveys of Mercyhurst graduates indicate that those who complete 
an internship receive more job offers and higher starting salaries than those 
who did not complete an internship. 

TYPES OF PLACEMENTS 

Internships can be full-time, part-time or summer placements. A full-time 
placement allows a student to be placed for a period of 10 to 30 weeks. 
Part-time placements are typically 10 to 15 weeks in length and are often 
done during the course of the normal academic calendar. Summer 
placements allow students to work part-time or full-time with an 
organization; the number of hours is dependent on the 
student’s/organization’s needs. 

Students interested in completing an internship must attend an information 
session and complete an internship application form. Student applications 
must be signed/approved by the student’s academic advisor and 
department director. 

Zero Credit Option: Students wishing to complete an internship 
experience without having to earn academic credit can now enroll in this 
option. A zero credit internship appears on the transcript like a credit 
bearing experience. Contact the Director for Internships at 814-824-2171. 

COOPERATIVE AGREEMENTS 
Lake Erie University of Osteopathic Medicine 
3+4 Accelerated Program in Medicine 

Mercyhurst University and the Lake Erie University of Osteopathic Medicine 
(LECOM) School of Medicine have an affiliation agreement that pledges our 
commitment to the training of future medical practitioners by giving 
students the opportunity to complete their medical education in two 
phases. Phase I consists of three years of undergraduate and pre-med 
education at Mercyhurst University, and Phase II consists of four years of 
medical education at LECOM School of Medicine. In consultation with an 

advisor, a program of study that follows the guidelines stipulated in the plan 
of agreement will be created. 

2+3 and 3+3 Accelerated Program in Pharmacy 

Mercyhurst University and the Lake Erie University of Osteopathic Medicine 
(LECOM) School of Pharmacy have an affiliation agreement that pledges our 
commitment to the training of future pharmacy practitioners by giving 
students the opportunity to complete their pharmacy education in two 
phases. Phase I consists of two or three years of undergraduate and prepharmacy 
education at Mercyhurst University, and Phase II consists of three 
years of pharmacy education at LECOM School of Pharmacy. In consultation 
with an advisor, a program of study that follows the guidelines stipulated in 
the plan of agreement will be created. 

Accelerated program in Chiropractic Medicine 

Mercyhurst University and New York Chiropractic University have entered 
into an affiliation agreement that will allow students to matriculate into the 
Doctor of Chiropractic Medicine program at New York Chiropractic University 
following their third year of study at Mercyhurst University. This 
matriculation is contingent upon successful completion of transition 
requirements which are available on the biology department website and 
can be obtained from the Pre-Health Advisor at Mercyhurst University. Upon 
successful completion of the student’s first year at New York Chiropractic 
University, a bachelor of art degree in biology will be awarded to the 
student from Mercyhurst University. 

3+3 Accelerated program in Podiatric Medicine 

Mercyhurst University and the Ohio University of Podiatric Medicine have 
entered into an affiliation agreement that will allow students to matriculate 
into the Doctor of Podiatric Medicine program at the Ohio University of 
Podiatric Medicine following their third year of study at Mercyhurst 
University. This matriculation is contingent upon successful completion of 
transition requirements, which are available on the biology department 
website and can be obtained from the Pre-Health Advisor at Mercyhurst 
University. Upon successful completion of the student’s first year at the Ohio 
University of Podiatric Medicine, a bachelor of art degree in biology will be 
awarded to the student from Mercyhurst University. Following successful 
completion of three years of study at the Ohio University of Podiatric 
Medicine, the student will be awarded the doctoral degree in Podiatric 
Medicine. 

Duquesne University Law School 

Duquesne University Law School in Pittsburgh and Mercyhurst University 
have a “3-3 program,” in which after three years of academic study at 
Mercyhurst University, and subject to specific conditions which are a 
cumulative grade point average of 3.5 for three years at Mercyhurst (96 
credit hours), completion of all undergraduate curriculum in major field and 
liberal studies requirements, a minimum LSAT score in the 60th percentile 
(155+), be recommended by the Vice President of Academic Affairs and 
participate in an interview with the Dean of Admissions of Duquesne 
University School of Law for completion of the J.D. degree. Each student in 
this early admission program will be awarded a bachelor’s degree by 
Mercyhurst University after successful completion of the first year at the 
Duquesne University School of Law. See the pre-law advisor in the Office of 
Career Services. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


ACADEMIC AFFAIRS 24 ACADEMIC AFFAIRS 


4 + 1 Accelerated MBA Program at Rochester Institute of 
Technology 

Mercyhurst University has established an agreement with Rochester 
Institute of Technology (RIT) whereby qualified students who have earned a 
bachelor’s degree can accelerate their MBA program. A maximum of six MBA 
foundation courses may be waived. A grade of “B” or better in the 
undergraduate courses may qualify for waiver of graduate level coursework. 
The courses must also be no older than five years upon matriculation into 
the MBA degree program. Students must apply to RIT for admission into the 
program and meet the required minimum GMAT and GPA requirements. 

Fashion Institute of Technology 

The Fashion Institute of Technology (F.I.T.), an accredited institution 
offering programs in a variety of areas including Fashion Merchandising, 
sponsors a visiting student program which allows students throughout the 
United States to study for a full year, an opportunity which provides 
excellent social, cultural, and professional advantages. Students studying for 
a full year at F.I.T. will graduate with an associate degree from F.I.T. in 
addition to their baccalaureate degree from Mercyhurst. Prior to applying to 
participate in the F.I.T. visiting student program, Mercyhurst students must 
consult with the director of the Fashion Merchandising program. Students 
apply in December the year before attendance, which can be either junior or 
senior year. F.I.T. sets minimum standards for acceptance: a cumulative 

G.P.A. of 3.0 or higher. This G.P.A. does not guarantee acceptance. F.I.T. 
retains the right to access transcripts from all universities attended and 
selects the most qualified students. 
STUDY ABROAD/OFF-CAMPUS PROGRAMS 

Qualified students who have completed four regular semesters may be 
granted permission to spend all or part of their year in study at a university 
in another country. Students who wish to study abroad must have a 
minimum 2.75 grade point average. Degree credit is granted upon 
successful completion of an approved program of international study. 
Students seeking approval to study abroad should contact the office of study 
abroad at least six months prior to the proposed start date of the proposed 
program. Permission to study abroad must be obtained from the dean of 
global programs using the university’s application processes; credits from 
study abroad completed outside of the university’s established approval 
processes will not, in most cases, be eligible for transfer. Interested students 
are advised to contact the office of study abroad to begin planning a 
minimum of two semesters before the proposed study. Exceptions to any 
study abroad policy must be granted in writing by the dean of global 
programs. 

Independent Study Abroad: Mercyhurst is affiliated with several 
international organizations, including API, Global Links, CEA and AFIS, and 
will grant credit for overseas travel approved through established university 
application processes by the dean of global programs. Students interested in 
studying abroad through an affiliated provider should contact the office of 
study abroad before applying either in writing or online to the affiliate 
program. Students who wish to receive credit for overseas travel/study 
abroad must secure in written approval through university application 
processes as noted above prior to the travel/study. The university will not, in 
most cases, accept transferred credits if the student has not secured 
appropriate permissions and/or approvals in advance of a study broad 
experience. Students interested in study abroad should review the study 

abroad link under “Academics” on the portal or stop by the office of study 
abroad in Preston 105. 

Faculty Student Academic Travel (FSAT): In addition, Mercyhurst 
regularly offers students the opportunity to participate in faculty-led study 
abroad excursions that allow students and their instructors to study and 
learn together about the richness of our global community. Students may 
enroll in one or more university courses that combine classroom content and 
travel to international destinations. Courses in this program, known as FSAT, 
are offered each year and are typically announced and open for enrollment 
in the spring of the academic year prior to course offerings and travel. 
Students must successfully complete both the coursework and the travel in 
order to receive credit for an FSAT course. Grades for the courses are 
assigned after the successful completion of both the in-classroom content 
and the travel. Students interested in study abroad should review the study 
abroad link under “Academics” on the portal or stop by the study abroad 
office in Preston 105. 

Mercyhurst In Ireland: Students also have the opportunity to spend either 
a full semester or a mini term in Dungarvan, Ireland, Erie’s sister city. Each 
semester, Mercyhurst faculty members go abroad with students, and 
together with faculty members in Ireland, teach a range of courses that 
fulfill requirements in the REACH Curriculum and, depending on the term, 
major and minor requirements. Credit for courses is granted upon successful 
completion of classes in Ireland. Faculty members and students study and 
travel together throughout the term, including weekend trips to Dublin and 
the west coast and an excursion to continental Europe. Students interested 
in a semester in Ireland should review the study abroad link under 
“Academics” on the portal or stop by the study abroad office in Preston 105. 
Students seeking full semester study are encouraged to begin planning at 
least a year in advance, consulting with their academic advisor and dean of 
global programs. 

PROFESSIONAL SCHOOL PREPARATION 

Mercyhurst students interested in professional careers in such fields as law, 
dentistry, medicine, osteopathy, pharmacy and veterinary medicine may 
choose a major from among a variety of academic disciplines. Students are 
urged early in their freshmen year to consult with one of the university’s 
pre-professional advisors to assist them in determining an appropriate 
major, minor, choice of courses, and to learn the educational requirements 
necessary for entrance into professional schools. 

PRE-HEALTH PROFESSIONS ADVISORY PROGRAM 

The university has a pre-health professions advising program, which 
provides specialized counseling and advisement to students regarding all 
aspects of becoming a health care professional. The advisors work with 
students on course selection, career direction, and preparation for 
admittance exams (e.g. MCATs). Advisors also assist students with the 
application process and final preparations for going on to professional 
school. More information is available by contacting Michael A. Elnitsky, 
Ph.D., Dean of Zurn College and Director of Pre-Health Advising; Mercyhurst 
University, 501 East 38th Street, Erie, PA. 16546 ; Phone: 814-824-2346, or 
email: melnitsky@mercyhurst.edu 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


ACADEMIC AFFAIRS 25 ACADEMIC AFFAIRS 


THE EVELYN LINCOLN INSTITUTE FOR ETHICS AND SOCIETY 

Society at all levels is faced by unique, even unprecedented challenges: a 
gradually globalizing world marketplace pressuring our institutions to 
become more dynamic and adaptable; emerging technologies, which shrink 
distances between peoples and enhance human quality of life even as they 
accelerate social change; the growing resource demands of a technologically 
advanced human civilization which increasingly imperil the fragility of our 
planet's natural environment. 

Each of these challenges, while posing economic, political and social 
questions, also poses fundamental ethical questions: 

Who are we as human beings? 

What values and principles should guide our path toward the future? 

How do we make our institutions embody both integrity and 

adaptability? 

Amid all of the challenges of contemporary life, how can we continue 

to work toward a more just, sustainable and participatory society? 

Guided by the historic values focus of Mercyhurst University, the Evelyn 
Lincoln Institute for Ethics & Society exists to promote increased attention to 
the ethical issues that confront people in their everyday and professional 
lives, and to provide both Mercyhurst and the broader regional community 
with opportunities to develop greater ethical awareness, sensitivity, and 
innovative strategies for dealing with ethical problems and conflicts. 

The institute hosts several events each year that are free and open to all 
members of the Mercyhurst University and the surrounding community. Dr. 
Daniel McFee and Dr. Kevin Sullivan founded the Mercyhurst Institute for 
Ethics and Society in 2007. It was renamed in 2008 as the Evelyn Lincoln 
Institute for Ethics and Society in memory of Evelyn Lincoln, a 1930 graduate 
of Mercyhurst College. 
Co-Director, Daniel McFee, Ph.D. Associate Professor of Religious StudiesCo-
Director, Kevin Sullivan, Ph.D. Associate Professor of Philosophy 

Website: http://www.mercyhurst.edu/academics/institutes/evelynlincoln-
institute-ethics-society 

LIBRARY SERVICES 

The mission of the library is to enhance the Mercyhurst education process by 
cultivating an information rich environment and develop life-long learners 
and moral consumers of information. The Hammermill Library provides 
materials and services in support of the University curricula and the scholarly 
needs and interests of the University community. Special collections include 
the Eimer Curriculum Collection, the Sister Mary Lawrence Franklin Archival 
Center, and the D’Angelo Music Collection. 

Hammermill Library’s collections contain over 110,000 book volumes and 
more than 11,000 audiovisual items. The library subscribes to 400 
periodicals and provides access to over 23,000 more online. The library’s 
information technology infrastructure provides access to the online catalog, 
electronic reserve readings, detailed research guides, online indexes and 
databases, and full-text electronic journals. Additionally, research 
assistance, interlibrary loan, EZ-borrow, course reserve readings and library 
user instruction remain integral components of the library’s mission to serve 
the research and information needs of the University. The library offers a 
variety of Information Literacy workshops centered around today’s research 
methods and technologies. 

The library provides a variety of spaces for study including reading rooms, 
study carrels, and group study rooms. There are 105 computer 
workstations—all with access to library resources, the university network, 
and the internet. Most of these also provide word processing, spreadsheet, 
and related software as well. There are three computer lab/classrooms in 
the library with computers in varying arrangements. During regular 
academic semesters, the library is open 104 hours per week. The 24/7 Study 
Lounge is located within the library. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


26 


ADMISSIONS 


Consistent with our mission and values, Mercyhurst University holistically 
reviews applicants when making admissions decisions. We evaluate 
applicants in terms of their academic abilities and potential, leadership and 
extracurricular involvement, and the potential contributions they might 
make as members of our campus community. The university entrance policy 
is free of discrimination on the grounds of race, creed, color, sex or national 
origin. To be considered for admission, applicants are required to submit an 
application, an official high school transcript, personal essay/statement and 
academic recommendation. 

We do not require the SAT or ACT for admissions, though students who 
believe that their SAT or ACT scores represent a positive component of their 
admissions portfolio are invited to submit their official test scores. To send 
your scores directly to Mercyhurst University, use SAT Code 2410 or ACT Code 
3629. If you’ve taken the test multiple times, we consider the highest score 
you’ve received on each section of the test to generate your SAT or ACT 
“super score.” Applicants are also strongly advised to schedule an 
appointment for an interview with an admissions counselor and use the 
opportunity to tour the campus. 

Applicants must also have 16 units of university preparatory secondary 
school work distributed: A) four units of English; B) five units of social 
science; C) three units of mathematics; D) two units of science (with one 
lab); and E) two units of a foreign language. 

Once an applicant’s file is complete, Office of Admissions professionals 
carefully review it. Successful applicants to Mercyhurst University generally 
rank in the top third of their high school and have commensurate academic 
records and standardized test scores. 

Mercyhurst University has developed an admissions process to evaluate each 
applicant in a personal and professional manner. In addition to quantitative 
criteria, the Office of Admissions professionals also take into account other 
intangible values. These include the degree of difficulty of the high school 
curriculum, participation in extracurricular and community service activities, 
evidence of leadership potential, and special talents an individual might 
possess which the university wishes to add to the student population. Such 
talents might include academic excellence, artistic or athletic talent, 
outstanding community involvement, etc. 

Students not offered admission to Mercyhurst University are often referred 
to Mercyhurst’s North East campus where they may begin their university 
career. There is always the possibility to transfer to Mercyhurst University’s 
Baccalaureate College after one year or through successful completion of an 
associate degree. 

SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS 

Admission to the university’s fine arts programs in music and dance require 
an audition before an admission decision can be rendered. Details 
concerning auditions can be obtained by contacting the Admissions Office at 
814-824-2202, or via email at admissions@mercyhurst.edu. 

CAMPUS VISITS 

Personal interviews are not required for admission; however, prospective 
students are strongly encouraged to visit the campus and schedule an 

individual meeting with an Admissions Counselor. An appointment must be 
made at least one week in advance of the visit by calling 1-800-825-1926, 
ext. 2202. Saturday appointments are possible during the Fall and Spring 
semesters. 

NOTIFICATION OF ADMISSION DECISION 

Beginning in November, decisions on admission to Mercyhurst University 
will be made as soon as the applicant’s admission file is complete. It is the 
responsibility of all applicants to see that all supporting documents are sent 
to the university in a timely fashion. 

CONFIRMATION DEPOSIT 

Students who are accepted into Mercyhurst University are required to 
submit a $400 confirmation deposit. This deposit is nonrefundable and will 
be applied towards the student’s tuition during their first semester at 
Mercyhurst University. Students may, however, request an extension of the 
deposit deadline without penalty when there are concerns regarding their 
eligibility for financial aid and the availability of on-campus housing. The 
request for an extension to the deposit deadline must be in writing. 

TRANSFER POLICY 

Transfer applications are processed for the Fall and Spring semesters. 
Complete application packets must be filed well in advance of the semester 
students expect to enter Mercyhurst. 

The student’s credentials will be evaluated by the transfer counselor and/or 
department director upon receipt of official transcripts from all universities 
attended. Students with less than 24 completed college credits and less 
than a 3.0 cumulative GPA must also submit an official high school transcript 
or a copy of the GED (General Equivalency Diploma) certificate. Once this 
process is completed, the student will be notified of the Admissions 
Committee’s decision. 

All transfer students must: 

1. 
Submit an application for admission. There is no fee for applying 
online. 
2. 
Forward an official copy of the high school transcript or GED certificate 
(if less than 24 completed college credits and less than a 3.0 
cumulative GPA). 
3. 
Submit an official transcript from each institution of higher education 
attended since high school graduation. 
4. 
Supply the university with a copy of separation papers if a veteran. 
5. 
Have the dean of students from each college or university attended 
complete the Mercyhurst University Transfer Form. 
Evaluation of transfer credits is the responsibility of the Admission Office, 
the Registrar’s Office, and where applicable, the major department director. 
The following guidelines are used in determining a student’s class standing. 

1. 
No grade below C is acceptable for transfer. 
2. 
Only credits are transferable and are recorded on a Mercyhurst 
transcript. Letter grades and cumulative average do not transfer. 
3. 
Transfers must complete at least 41 credits at Mercyhurst. At least half 
of the credits in the major field must be taken at Mercyhurst. 
Therefore, the maximum number of transferable credits is 80. No more 
2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


ADMISSIONS 
27 ADMISSIONS 


than 60 credits may be transferred from an accredited junior or 

community university. 

4. 
Credit will generally be granted for those courses that are reasonably 
equivalent in content and subject matter to existing Mercyhurst 
University courses. 
5. 
No more than 6 credits in physical education activity courses are 
transferable. 
6. 
No more than 45 credits of college or university coursework, taken as 
dual enrollment while in high school are transferrable. Coursework 
must be posted on an institution’s official transcript. A minimum 
grade of C is required. College courses taught in the high school 
classroom are limited to 15 credits of transfer credit. 
7. 
A student applying for transfer into an education major must 
complete the student teaching requirement through Mercyhurst 
University. 
8. 
Orientation, internship, co-op and practicum credits are not 
transferable. 
THE INTERNATIONAL BACCALAUREATE PROGRAM 

The International Baccalaureate Program (IB) is a two-year pre-university 
course designed for high school juniors and seniors who are able and 
interested in challenging reading, thinking, and writing. 

The IB program is comprehensive, adhering to worldwide standards, and is 
designed to provide students with a balanced education. It includes all the 
main liberal arts disciplines: languages, social sciences, experimental 
sciences, mathematics and humanities. 

Successful completion of the program earns for the student a diploma 
recognized for university admission throughout the world. 

Mercyhurst University recognizes graduates of this program by awarding 
both credit and placement for specific scores on the IB examinations. For 
credit to be awarded, students must earn a score of 5 or above on the 
standard exam and a score of 4 or above on the higher level exam. 

ACCEPTANCE OF CREDITS FROM OTHER INSTITUTIONS 

Students transferring to Mercyhurst are required to identify all accredited 
and unaccredited post-secondary institutions they have attended, and 
ensure that transcripts from each institution are sent directly to the Office of 
Admissions. Failure to do so can result in disciplinary action. This 
information affects financial aid decisions as well as academic assessment. 
For such students, an admissions decision will be made, in part, on the 
student’s previous performance. Mercyhurst will review courses in which the 
student has earned a C or better from accredited institutions and identify 
placement in the student’s course of study at Mercyhurst. All courses 
considered for meeting requirements in the major will be reviewed by the 
department chair within the student’s first semester of study. No more than 
80 credits (total) can be transferred, and no more than 50 percent of a 
student’s major course requirements can be transferred. 

Mercyhurst University, upon careful review by the Office of Academic Affairs 
and/or department chair, will accept a maximum of 15 credits from non-
regionally accredited post-secondary institutions which are accredited by an 
agency recognized by the U.S. Department of Education and legally 
authorized to grant specialized associate degrees or higher. Coursework will 
be evaluated for transfer credit, only if the content of the coursework is in 

reasonable conformity to the Mercyhurst University curriculum and when a 
grade of “B” or higher has been earned. In all cases, accepted transfer 
courses will carry an award of credits, but neither a grade, nor quality points 
will be awarded. Transfer credits may only be applied to fulfill lower division 
(level 100 and level 200) baccalaureate degree requirements. 

ACCEPTANCE OF CREDITS FOR ONLINE COURSES 

Credits may be accepted for an online course if it meets all requirements of 
the current transfer credit policy and procedures, and was taken through an 
accredited institution that has a physical campus offering traditional, on 
campus, in person courses. 

SECOND DEGREE 

Students who hold a baccalaureate degree from another accredited college 
or university may earn a baccalaureate degree from Mercyhurst University 
by qualifying in every other way as stated in the Transfer Policy, except that 
a minimum of 30 credits must be completed at Mercyhurst instead of the 
stipulated 45 credits. 

Students with a degree from another college or university may also earn 
teacher certification at Mercyhurst. The chair of the Education Department 
will work out the details. Both second-degree candidates and certification 
candidates from another college or university must go through the 
admission process. Applicants should contact the Office of Adult Enrollment 
Services for assistance. 

INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS 

International students must submit the following to be considered for 
admission: 

1. 
A completed application form, including educational records 
translated into English and notarized. 
2. 
There is no fee for applying online. 
3. 
Original copies of the “Test of English as a Foreign Language” (TOEFL) 
or IELTS scores, only if English is not your native language. Our school 
code is 2410. 
4. 
The completed Certification of Finances form in U.S. dollars. 
5. 
Bank affidavit. A notarized document on bank letterhead verifying U.S. 
dollar amounts available. 
6. 
Original test score results of the SAT or ACT, if available. If you plan to 
participate in intercollegiate athletics, these test scores are required. 
7. 
Pre-Admission Health Record completed in full. 
8. 
A statement certifying coverage under a health insurance plan valid in 
the United States. 
9. 
Students transferring from another university must have World 
Education Services (WES) evaluate their transcripts using “Course-by-
Course Report.” Full course descriptions must also be submitted with 
Mercyhurst university applications. 
10. 
A copy of your photograph passport page. 
It is incumbent upon the applicant to ensure that all materials are provided 
to the university on a timely basis. Direct any specific questions about 
international student admission to the Director of International Admissions 
and Services. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


28 


OFFICE OF ADULT ENROLLMENT 


The Office of Adult Enrollment, part of the Office of Graduate and Continuing 
Education, assists with admission, and provides an avenue to resources of 
academic advisement, registration and related services to adult 
undergraduate and post-baccalaureate students. The staff is committed to 
serving the diverse needs of adult learners who are preparing for new 
careers, looking for job advancement, returning to the classroom to expand 
their knowledge in specialized areas, seeking to complete their education, 
or engaging in academic pursuits for their enrichment and enjoyment. 

ADULT UNDERGRADUATE PROGRAMS 

Mercyhurst University invites applications from adults defined as an 
individual aged 24 or older, or married, or a veteran of the armed 
forces or someone who has a dependent. Credits earned at other 
accredited post-secondary institutions may be transferred in and applied 
towards a Mercyhurst degree. Students may pursue the following programs 
on a full-time or part-time basis: Associate of Science, Bachelor of Arts, 
Bachelor of Science and Bachelor of Music. Adult students, including those 
enrolled at another post-secondary institution, may complete up to four 
undergraduate courses as a transient (visiting) student. 

POST-BACCALAUREATE PROGRAMS 

Mercyhurst University invites applicants who hold an undergraduate or 
graduate degree from an accredited post-secondary institution. 
Students may pursue the following programs on a full-time or part-time 
basis: 

• Post-Baccalaureate Advanced Certificate 
• Post-Baccalaureate Teacher Certification 
ACADEMIC POLICIES 

Adult undergraduate and post-baccalaureate students are subject to the 
academic policies and procedures outlined elsewhere in this catalog. 

AWARD OF CREDIT FOR NONTRADITIONAL LEARNING 
CREDIT FOR PRIOR LEARNING 

In order to facilitate students completing their degree requirements in a 
timely manner, Mercyhurst University will issue up to 30 credits toward an 
associate degree and up to 60 credits toward a bachelor’s degree. 

1. 
Standardized Examinations – 
a. 
Advanced Placement (AP) Credit earned from high school prior 
to entering Mercyhurst University: for course equivalency and 
credit to be awarded, students must earn a score of 4 or above 
on the AP Exam; 
b. 
International Baccalaureate (IB) examinations: for course 
equivalency and credit to be awarded, students must earn a 
score of 5 or above on the standard exam and a score of 4 or 
above on the higher level exam); 
c. 
College Level Examination Program (CLEP): for course 
equivalency and credit to be awarded, a minimum score 
equivalent to a “C” as determined by the academic department 
is required to award credit for a CLEP exam (see CLEP chart under 
“Examination Credit”). 
Notes: 

a. 
AP, CLEP or a comprehensive course examination may not 
be used by a student to challenge a grade in a course 
taken at Mercyhurst University. Only by repeating the 
course may a student remediate a grade. 
b. 
Ordinarily, credit received through CLEP or AP is applied to 
satisfy Core Curriculum or elective requirements. 
c. 
All credit received through proficiency exams appear on 
the student transcript as PASS. Failure will not be 
recorded on the transcript. 
2. 
Challenge Exams (ordinarily provided by the Academic 
Department); 
3. 
Published Guides that evaluate credit equivalencies: 
a. 
American Council on Education (ACE) for military training 
and experience, 
b. 
ACE (non-collegiate) for industrial and corporate training 
programs; 
4. 
Prior Learning Assessment/Credit for Life Experience (PLA/CLE). 
To obtain credit using a portfolio, a student must (i) first complete a 
Portfolio course and (ii) provide a portfolio containing sufficient 
evidence that she or he has mastered the learning outcome and 
associated assessments in the course in which she/he wishes to obtain 
credit. 
a. 
The Portfolio course will enable students to interpret 
learning outcomes and how they are assessed, consider 
ways in which learning outcomes can be addressed in 
nontraditional settings (outside of the classroom), 
critically examine their own prior-and life-learning 
opportunities, and synthesize these into a portfolio to be 
submitted for PLA. 
Tuition and Fees: 

Adult Undergraduate (per course) 

$2,088 

Proficiency Exam (includes testing fee) $489 

Portfolio-based Assessment fee (per course) $489 

CLEP (per course) 
$252 

ACCEPTANCE OF CREDITS FROM OTHER INSTITUTIONS 

Students transferring to Mercyhurst are required to identify all accredited 
and unaccredited post-secondary institutions they have attended, and 
ensure that transcripts from each institution are sent directly to the Office of 
Admissions. Failure to do so can result in disciplinary action. This 
information affects financial aid decisions as well as academic assessment. 
For such students, an admissions decision will be made, in part, on the 
student’s previous performance. Mercyhurst will review courses in which the 
student has earned a C or better from accredited institutions and identify 
placement in the student’s course of study at Mercyhurst. All courses 
considered for meeting requirements in the major will be reviewed by the 
department chair within the student’s first semester of study. No more than 
80 credits can be applied to the student’s overall requirements either 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


OFFICE OF ADULT ENROLLMENT 29 OFFICE OF ADULT ENROLLMENT 


transferred, earned through Prior Learning Assessment, or a combination of 
the two, and no more than 50 percent of a student’s major course 
requirements can be earned in the same way. 

Mercyhurst University, upon careful review by the Office of Academic Affairs 
and/or department chair, will accept a maximum of 15 credits from non-
regionally accredited post-secondary institutions which are accredited by an 
agency recognized by the U.S. Department of Education and legally 
authorized to grant specialized associate degrees or higher. Coursework will 
be evaluated for transfer credit, only if the content of the coursework is in 
reasonable conformity to the Mercyhurst University curriculum and when a 
grade of “B” or higher has been earned. In all cases, accepted transfer 
courses will carry an award of credits, but neither a grade, nor quality points 
will be awarded. Transfer credits may only be applied to fulfill lower division 
(level 100 and level 200) baccalaureate degree requirements. 

In addition, returning adult students who have not been enrolled for five 
years may qualify for a special “academic forgiveness” provision. Contact the 
Office of the Registrar for further information. 

SCHEDULE 

The Office of Adult Enrollment responds to inquiries from prospective adult 
and post-baccalaureate students throughout the year. Admitted students 
may begin their studies in the fall, spring or summer semesters. A wide 
selection of courses for adult undergraduate and post-baccalaureate 
students are offered on weekday mornings, afternoons and evenings, as 
well as Saturday and Sunday. Online courses are also available (see below). 

SPECIAL PROGRAMS 

Adult undergraduate students may participate in an accelerated degree 
program in business and related concentrations that permits eligible 
students to pursue a half-time or full time schedule while attending classes 
one or two evenings per week. 

Mercyhurst University is a member of the Online Consortium of Independent 
Colleges and Universities (OCICU). OCICU is a network of national and 
international colleges and universities that provides web-based learning 
opportunities to adult and graduate students enrolled in member 
institutions. 

Adult undergraduate students may register for three OCICU courses (9 
credits) per academic year. A maximum of 36 credits earned through OCICU 
may be applied toward degree requirements. The total number of OCICU, 
transfer, and Prior Learning Assessment credits may not exceed 80. Students 
must complete at least 50 percent of major courses through traditional 
classroom courses at Mercyhurst. 

Post-baccalaureate students may register for three OCICU courses (9 credits) 
per academic year. A maximum of 18 credits earned through OCICU may be 
applied toward certificate requirements. The total number of OCICU credits 
plus transfer credits may not exceed 50 percent of the total credits required 
for the certificate. 

A current list of online courses is available through the Office of Adult 
Enrollment. 

FINANCIAL AID FOR ADULT STUDENTS 

Financial aid is available to eligible adult undergraduate students. 

REDUCED TUITION 

Adult students who begin university at least four years after graduating 
from high school or receiving their GED qualify for reduced tuition. Reduced 
tuition is also available to any student who holds a baccalaureate degree 
from an accredited university or university. 

COMPANY REIMBURSEMENT 

Many employers offer a tuition reimbursement plan for successfully 
completed courses. Qualifying students may defer their tuition until the end 
of the semester. No interest will be charged. Forms are available in the 
Office of Adult Enrollment Services. 

CATHERINE MCAULEY ADULT STUDENT SCHOLARSHIPS 

A limited number of scholarships are available for nontraditional students 
who meet academic and financial need criteria and who do not receive 
tuition assistance from their employer. 

University TRY FUND 

The “University Try” Fund enables adult students to pay significantly 
reduced tuition for refresher courses in university writing, math, and critical 
reading. These courses will help prepare students for future success as adult 
university students. The reduced tuition is available without regard to 
financial need. 

FEDERAL AND STATE GRANTS 

Full-time (12 credits/semester) and half-time (6 credits/semester) students 
are eligible to apply for a Federal PELL Grant. If a student is a resident of 
Pennsylvania for at least one year, he/she also may qualify for a 
Pennsylvania Higher Education Assistance Association Grant (PHEAA). To 
apply for these grants, students must file the Free Application for Federal 
Student Aid (FAFSA) as well as the Mercyhurst Financial Aid Application. Use 
003297 for the Mercyhurst University Title IV school code on the FAFSA. For 
quicker return, file the FAFSA at www.fafsa.ed.gov. 

FEDERAL DIRECT LOAN (MASTER PROMISSORY NOTE) 

Full-time (12 credits/semester) and half-time (6 credits/semester) students 
can obtain low interest student loans (subsidized) that are not payable until 
6 months following graduation. A student can borrow additional funds in 
unsubsidized student loans. Unlike the subsidized loan, interest on 
unsubsidized loans begins the day the loan is disbursed with the principle 
deferred until 6 months after graduation. Applications are available through 
the Office of Adult Enrollment Services. A student must file a FAFSA at 
fafsa.edu.gov. Use 003297 for the Mercyhurst University Title IV school code 
on the FAFSA. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


OFFICE OF ADULT ENROLLMENT 
30 OFFICE OF ADULT ENROLLMENT 


VETERANS’ RESOURCES 

Students who have served in the military including the National Guard and 
Reserves may be eligible for educational benefits through the Veterans 
Administration. Mercyhurst University is a yellow ribbon participant, which 
means students who are eligible for 100 percent Post 9-11 GI Bill® will be 
able to receive yellow ribbon funding once the student cap has been 
reached. Mercyhurst also holds a Memorandum of Understanding with the 
Department of Defense. This allows members who are still in the service to 
use Tuition Assistance (TA) from the Military. (Current active military 
personnel should apply for TA benefits directly to their unit.) There are a 
number of VA benefits available. For more information on available benefits 
and their criteria, visit the VA website at www.benefits.va.gov/GIBILL. 

Dependents of military personnel may be eligible for educational assistance 
for any of the following from the VA: 

• 
A transfer of Post 9-11 GI Bill® for active service members who 
have served at least 10 years 
• 
Chapter 35 benefits if a service member has been discharged 
and receives disability 
• 
FRY Scholarship if the service member died while serving 
*GI Bill® is a registered trademark of the U.S. Department of Veterans 

Affairs (VA). 

If you plan to use VA educational Benefits please contact the Veteran 
Coordinator for more information. You will need to apply for the VA benefits 
before the start of your first semester. New applications may take the VA up 
to three weeks to process. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


STUDENT FINANCIAL SERVICES 31 STUDENT FINANCIAL SERVICES 


STUDENT FINANCIAL SERVICES 


TUITION AND FEES: ERIE CAMPUS 
Tuition & Fees (per semester): 
Traditional Undergraduate: 
Full-time 12-18 credit hours $16,215 
Over 18 hours (additional per credit) $ 1,081 
Less than 12 hours (per credit) $ 1,081 
Summer 2016 (per credit) $ 884 
Adult Undergraduate (per course) $ 2,088 
Post Baccalaureate (per course) $ 1,599 
High School (per credit) $ 105 
College Try (per course) $ 489 
Proficiency Exam (Includes testing fee) $ 489 
Audit/Professional Development (per course) $ 489 
Experience Learning (per course) $ 489 
Mercyhurst Prep (per course) $ 228 
CLEP (per course) $ 252 
REQUIRED FEE SCHEDULE PER SEMESTER 
Traditional: 
Registration $ 65 
Technology $ 289.50 
Building Assessment $ 563 
(Pro-rated at $54 per credit for part time students) 
Student Government $ 100 
Green Energy Fee $ 7.50 
Adult/ Post Baccalaureate: 
Registration $ 65 
Technology $ 90 
Intensive English Program (IEP): 
Fee per 8 week session for 4 courses $ 2,800 
OCCASIONAL FEES 
Orientation Fee-Traditional Freshman Only $ 225 
ID/One Card $ 35 
ID/One Card Replacement $ 20 
Math Placement Testing Fee $ 35 
Confirmation Deposit $ 400 
Capstone Clinical -Education $ 482 
Company Ensemble Elective Fee (per course) $ 324 
Music Fee -Per Semester $ 353 
Criminal Justice Fee – Course CRJIS 305 only $ 50 
Intelligence Studies Fee (per semester) $ 224 
Lab Fee (per course) $ 200 
Zurn Science Lab Fee (per course) $ 255 
Studio/Materials (per course) $ 200 
Distance Learning Fee (per online undergrad course) $ 50 
(Does not apply to OCICU courses) 
Graduation $ 170 
(Required fee even if student does not participate in 
ceremony) 
Official Transcript of Credits $ 5 

OCCASIONAL FEES CONTINUED 
Learning Differences Program: 
Summer Program Fee 
Annual Fee (Level Two Services only) 
$ 255 
$ 2,450 
Aim Program: 
Annual Fee (Level Three New 2016 students) 
Annual Fee (Level Three Returning Students) 
$6,000 
$4,900 
Applied Music Lesson Fee (per semester) 
Applies to the following courses: 
$ 450 

MUS 162, 262, 362, 462 Secondary Voice Lessons 
MUS 176, 276, 376, 476 Secondary Instrumental Lessons 

Study Abroad Program Fees 

(Billed in equal installments in fall and spring semesters) 

Spring Semester in Ireland 2017 (12 Weeks) 
Program Travel Fee $ 7,000 
Enrollment Deposit $ 300 

Mini 3 Term Course: Galapagos (January 2017) 
Program Travel Fee $ 4,200 
Enrollment Deposit $ 300 

Mini 3 Term Course: Mediterranean Voyage (January 2017) 
Program Travel Fee $4,200 
Enrollment Deposit $ 300 

Mini 3 Term Course: Dominican Republic (January 2017) 
Program Travel Fee $ 3,300 
Enrollment Deposit $ 300 

Mini 3 Term Course: Paris & London (Spring Break 2017) 
Program Travel Fee $ 3,700 
Enrollment Deposit $ 300 

Mini 4 Term Course: Ireland 2017 (6 Weeks) 
Program Travel Fee $3,700 
Enrollment Deposit $ 300 

Mini 4 Term Course: Iceland (May 2017) 
Program Travel Fee $4,000 
Enrollment Deposit $ 300 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


STUDENT FINANCIAL SERVICES 32 STUDENT FINANCIAL SERVICES 


ROOM CHARGES (PER OCCUPANT PER SEMESTER) 
Freshman Room (Baldwin-McAuley) $ 2,946 
Single Room (Baldwin-McAuley) $ 3,933 
Freshman Room (Warde Hall) $ 3,933 
Briggs/Lewis Apt. (4 person or double -Option A) $ 3,247 
Briggs/Lewis Apt. (3 person) $ 3,616 
Briggs/Lewis Apt. (single -Option B) $ 4,382 

Duval Apt./Warde Townhouse $ 3,552 
Lewis Avenue Townhouse $ 3,906 
East 41st Street Townhouse $ 3,906 
Wayne Street Apt. (4 person or Double-Option A) $ 3,906 
Wayne Street Apt. (3 person) $ 4,218 
Wayne Street Apt. (Single Option B) $ 4,841 
Mercy Apartments (2 person) $ 4,095 

MEAL PLANS (PER SEMESTER) 
Egan Plan (Minimum Residence Hall Plan) $ 2,866 
Egan Gold Plan $ 2,961 
Egan Platinum Plan $ 3,059 
Complete Plan $ 2,179 
Daily Diner Plan $ 1,845 
Lite Diner $ 1,571 
Convenient Diner Plan $ 1,172 
$500 Hurst Dining Club $ 500 
$750 Hurst Dining Club $ 750 
$1000 Hurst Dining Club $ 1,000 

FINANCIAL PENALTIES: 

Late Payment Fee $ 150 
Returned Check/ Stop Payment/Reissued Check $ 35 
Late Registration Fee $ 250 
Room Change Fee $ 50 

PAYMENT POLICY FOR TUITION, FEES, ROOM AND MEAL PLAN 

When you register for courses, you incur a legal obligation to pay for tuition, 
fees and all related charges. Registration for a given semester is not 
complete until all charges are paid by the bill due date, or until acceptable 
payment arrangements have been made with the Office of SFS prior to the 
due date. 

Students must be actively registered to reside in campus housing, receive 
student meal plan privileges, and receive all other university services and 
amenities. 

Student Financial Services participates in 100 percent online, real-time, 
billing. Ebills are accessible via your Mercyhurst portal. You are encouraged 
to grant guest access to any family member who may have an interest in 

viewing or paying your bill. Full instructions are available on your 
Mercyhurst portal. 

Summer 2016 bills are available via the ebill the first week of June and are 
due on or before June 30, 2016. Fall semester bills are available the last 
week of June and are due on or before Aug. 10, 2016. Spring semester bills 
are available in early December and are due on or before Jan. 4, 2017. All 
charges assessed after the initial billing due date are due immediately and 
must be paid within 30 days to avoid any late fees. You and your guests 
should check your ebill regularly for any updates and any changes you have 
made. 

Billing Due Dates for 2016-17: 
Summer Sessions 2016: June 30, 2016 
Fall Semester: Aug. 10, 2016 
Spring Semester: Jan. 4, 2017 

Students must be registered at least 12 credit hours for each semester to be 
considered full time and to receive the flat tuition rate and all institutional 
grants and scholarships. If registered over 18 credits, additional tuition 
charges apply. If registered less than 12 credits per semester, financial aid 
awards will be adjusted accordingly. 

ROTC scholarship recipients must be registered at least 12 credit hours in 
their program (not including ROTC credits) to be eligible for ROTC 
Scholarships. 

In addition to charges for tuition, fees, room, meal plans and other 
expenses, the bill reflects any scholarships, grants, and loans as pending 
financial aid. Financial aid listed is pending until the student’s eligibility is 
confirmed, verification is completed, and the student’s enrollment is verified 
on the census date. The census date is the morning after drop/add as 
published in the official academic calendar. 

Students with exceptional circumstances who want to add courses after the 
official drop/add date should obtain forms and more information in the 
Office of Academic Affairs (OAA) or the Registrar’s Office. Federal aid will not 
be adjusted for late registration under most circumstances and late 
registration fees may apply. 

In order to defer your bill to federal student loans, students must have a 
FAFSA® on file, and completed both the Master Promissory Note and 
Entrance Loan Counseling online for Federal Direct Loans and/or Perkins 
Loans by Aug. 1, 2016, for fall bills or Dec. 1, 2016, for spring bills. This is a 
one-time requirement at Mercyhurst. Federal Direct PLUS Loans are not 
credited to the student’s account until a promissory note is signed. Some 
PLUS borrowers may also be required to do PLUS Entrance Counseling. Those 
borrowers will be contacted directly by the U.S. Department of Education. 
Private Education Loan proceeds are not credited until the loan proceeds are 
received by Mercyhurst. 

If payment is not made by the due date, or satisfactory payment 
arrangements are not made with the SFS Office by the bill due date, a late 
payment fee of $150 will be applied to your account, your account will be 
placed on hold, and you may be deregistered from your courses. You will 
not be able to make changes to your registration, register for any 
additional courses, or receive grades/transcripts. Your balance must be 
paid in full by the specified semester due date. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


STUDENT FINANCIAL SERVICES 33 STUDENT FINANCIAL SERVICES 


Overdue accounts will be placed with a collection agency. If your account 
is placed with a collection agency, you will be responsible for your balance 
plus any collection fees, which may be based on a percentage up to a 
maximum of 33 percent of the debt, and all costs and expenses, including 
reasonable attorney’s fees that are incurred by Mercyhurst University in 
such collection efforts. This may negatively impact your credit rating. In 
order to register for future semesters, receive transcripts or a diploma, 
your balance and any collection fees must be paid in full. 

You can pay your balance via your ebill, which is accessible from your 
student portal. Payment can be made by credit card (convenience fees 
apply) or electronic funds transfer from a savings or checking account (no 
convenience fees apply). You can also print your bill and mail in a 
personal check, cashier’s check, or money order to the address on the bill. 
Cash payments can be made in person by visiting the SFS Office. Funds 
can also be wired electronically to Mercyhurst, which is especially 
convenient for international payments. For more information, please visit 
the SFS page on the student portal or contact the Office of SFS at 814-8242288. 
All payments, including those from a third party, such as a 529 
Savings Plan, must be received by the bill due date. Please plan 
accordingly to allow for mailing and processing time. 

In lieu of paying the student bill in full, a student or family can sign up 
for a payment plan (partial payments made in intervals) through our 
partner, Tuition Management Systems (TMS), prior to the bill due date. 
The TMS Payment Plan divides a student’s financial obligation into 
interest free installments over the semester, making financial 
obligations easier to manage. Monthly plans include afive-month or 
four-month plan. The TMS Payment Plan is available to all qualified 
undergraduate students for fall and spring semesters. There is a nonrefundable 
fee for participating in the TMS Payment Plan, regardless of 
the balance. TMS provides a monthly billing, with payment due usually 
the first day of the month. Failure to pay by monthly due dates will 
result in late fees, Business Office holds, and possible deregistration. 
Repeated delinquent payments will result in a cancelation of the 
payment plan and payment of any outstanding balance is immediately 
due to Mercyhurst. Failure to resolve an outstanding balance may result 
in deregistration and placing your outstanding account with a collection 
agency. 

Students receiving financial aid may also participate in the TMS Payment 
Plan. To determine the minimum monthly payment, deduct the amount of 
financial aid (not including work-study) from the annual charges, and then 
divide the balance by the number of payments in the plan you chose. It is 
important that you review your TMS budget each semester to ensure that 
the scheduled monthly payment plan reflects your actual charges at 
Mercyhurst. Be sure to use “net” loan proceeds in your calculations for 
federal loans, as they deduct an origination fee prior to sending your funds 
to Mercyhurst. For more information about the plan or how to calculate 
monthly payments, contact TMS directly at 1-888-285-3052, or visit 
www.afford.com/mercyhurst. If your projected budget at TMS is less than 
your actual balance at Mercyhurst, you may incur late fees at Mercyhurst 
and a business office hold will may be placed on your account, preventing 
future registration. 

If payment is made by check (paper or EFT), Mercyhurst will credit the funds 
but will not remove any Business Office Holds for at least seven days to 

allow time for the check to clear with your bank. If funds do not clear, a 
student may be charged a $150 late fee in addition to a $35 insufficient fund 
fee. In this instance, the student will be contacted and given one week to 
make payment to Mercyhurst in the form of a certified check or money 
order. Legal action may be taken against any person who has repeatedly 
submitted checks with insufficient funds, and Mercyhurst reserves the right 
to reject future check payments. 

TUITION AND FEE REFUND POLICY DUE TO TOTAL WITHDRAWAL 

Students who wish to withdraw from the university must complete a Cease 
Enrollment Form, available in the Office of Academic Affairs, and obtain the 
required authorizations and signatures. Students who officially withdraw 
before the end of the academic semester will receive course grades based on 
the academic withdrawal policy in OAA. 

Course withdrawals after drop/add will result in a W grade for the 
course. Students, who experience a medical, military or serious 
emergency, may file a letter with the Office of Academic Affairs 
explaining and documenting the special circumstances. 

Students who have officially withdrawn from the university and do not 
return within one academic year must apply for readmission. 

When a student officially withdraws from all courses (ceases enrollment), 
he/she may receive a prorated refund of tuition, room and meal plan 
charges depending on the date of withdrawal. Refer to the Tuition Refund 
Chart below. Fees are not refundable when withdrawal occurs after the 
drop/add period for that semester (usually the eighth day of the semester.) 

Period of Withdrawal During a 
Semester 
Percentage of Tuition Refund 
On or before the last day to 
drop/add each term (Up to and 
including calendar day 8) 
100% (including fees) 
Calendar days 9 -15 80% (not including fees) 
Calendar days 16 -22 70% (not including fees) 
Calendar day 23 -29 60% (not including fees) 
Calendar day 30 and beyond 0% (not including fees 

Refunds for room and meal plans will be refunded 100 percent through 
calendar day 8 of the semester for which you are registered, and prorated 
for number of days of usage between the ninth and 30th days of the 
semester. There are no refunds for tuition, room, or meal plans after the 
30th calendar day of the semester. 

The tuition refund policy for pre-summer, summer sessions, and clock-hour 
programs follow a different schedule than above because the length of the 
sessions/programs differ from the fall and spring semester calendars. The 
calculations are similar but are done in proportion to the length of the 
respective sessions/terms/program calendars. Refund information for these 
special sessions/programs is available in the Office of Student Financial 
Services. 

TREATMENT OF FINANCIAL AID FOR TOTAL WITHDRAWAL (CEASE 
ENROLLMENT) 

If a student withdraws from all courses (ceases to be enrolled), the SFS 
Office must review the student’s financial aid to determine whether 
financial aid funds must be adjusted in accordance with federal, state, and 
institutional policies governing total withdrawal from the university. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


STUDENT FINANCIAL SERVICES 
34 STUDENT FINANCIAL SERVICES 


SFS calculates refunds for tuition, room and meal plans according to 
university policy. However, the policies for financial aid for total 
withdrawals (cease enrollments) are specific to each designated financial 
aid program and are applicable only if the student was awarded that 
particular type of fund. If the student is awarded various types of financial 
aid, more than one policy may apply in determining the student’s revised 
financial aid eligibility. 

FEDERAL (TITLE IV) FINANCIAL AID REFUND POLICY (CEASE 
ENROLLMENT) 

The federal policy for return of Title IV funds maintains that the student can 
retain only that portion of federal aid that the student has earned based on 
time in attendance before withdrawal prior to completing 60 percent of a 
payment period or semester. The percentage of time that the student 
attended an academic semester determines the amount of federal aid that 
must be returned to the federal government. This federally mandated policy 
is independent of Mercyhurst’s institutional refund policy for tuition, room 
and meal plans. 

The schedules vary by start and end dates of each semester and each 
academic program. 

For a student who withdraws after the 60 percent point-in-time, there are 
no unearned funds. However, a school must still complete a return 
calculation in order to determine whether the student is eligible for a post-
withdrawal disbursement. The calculation is based on the percentage of 
earned aid using the following Federal Return of Title IV funds formula: 

Percentage of payment period or semester completed is the number 

of days completed up to the withdrawal date divided by the total days 

in the payment period or semester. (Any break of five days or more is 

not counted as part of the days in the semester.) This percentage is 

also the percentage of earned aid. 

Funds are returned to the appropriate federal program based on the 

percentage of unearned aid using the following formula: 

Aid to be returned is (100 percent of the aid that could be disbursed 

minus the percentage of earned aid) multiplied by the total amount of 

aid that could have been disbursed during the payment period or 

semester. 

If a student earned less aid than was disbursed, the institution would be 
required to return a portion of the funds and the student would be required 
to return a portion of the funds. Keep in mind that when Title IV funds are 
returned, the student borrower may owe a balance to the institution, which 
must be paid within 60 days of notification. 

If a student earned more aid than was disbursed to him/her, the institution 
would owe the student a post-withdrawal disbursement which must be 
paid within 120 days of the student's withdrawal. 

The institution must return the amount of Title IV funds for which it is 
responsible no later than 45 days after the date of the determination of the 
student's withdrawal. Refunds to aid programs are returned in the following 
order: 

• 
Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford Loans 
• 
Federal Direct Subsidized Stafford Loans 
• 
Federal Perkins Loans 
• 
Federal Direct PLUS Loans 
• 
Federal Pell Grants 
• 
Federal Supplemental Opportunity Grants 
• 
Other assistance under this title for which a return of funds is 
required 
Students who receive all F’s for a semester who did not formally withdraw 
will be considered Unofficial Withdrawals and will be reviewed by OAA to 
establish the students’ last date of attendance. If a student ceased 
attendance for all classes before 60 percent of the semester was over, that 
last date of attendance will be used. If a last date of attendance cannot be 
determined, the “unofficial” withdrawal date will be the mid-point of the 
semester in order to calculate unearned federal funds that must be returned 
to the appropriate federal aid program. 

Students need to understand that, although they can withdraw from a 
semester with W grades, federal aid disbursements have to be reviewed 
based on their last date of attendance or unofficial withdrawal date. 

The student is responsible for any returned federal funds that result in a 
balance due on their student account. If payment is not made within 60 
days, the student will be liable for all collection fees and costs as described 
above in the Payment Policy section. 

INSTITUTIONAL AND STATE GRANT/SCHOLARSHIP FINANCIAL AID 
REFUND POLICY (CEASE ENROLLMENT) 

Adjustments to institutional and/or state grant/scholarships follow the 
university’s policy on refunds for tuition (refer to the Tuition Refund Policy 
Due to Total Withdrawal section above). For example, if the student’s tuition 
is refunded 70 percent, the student’s institutional and/or state 
grants/scholarships will be refunded 70 percent, meaning that the student 
may retain 30 percent of each of the institutional and/or state 
grant/scholarship awards. However for the state grant/scholarship, where, 
in accordance with the above policy, the amount of State Grant funds to be 
retained by the university is small, and the amount to refund to the state is 
large, the Office of SFS may advise the student to forfeit the State Grant 
altogether when it appears that it will benefit the student. If the student 
forfeits the State Grant, it will enable Mercyhurst to refund the entire 
semester’s State Grant disbursement to PHEAA, thereby saving a semester of 
State Grant eligibility for the student and possibly avoiding a state aid 
academic program problem in the future. For example, if the student 
withdraws from the university during the second week of classes, the 
student will have 80 percent of his/her tuition refunded, and following 
PHEAA regulations, 80 percent of the State Grant will have to be refunded 
back to the state. If the PHEAA Grant is $1,000, $800 would be returned to 
the state and the student would be able to retain $200 to pay for any 
educational charges for the two weeks in attendance. In this instance, it is 
strongly recommended that the entire $1,000 be sent back to the state so 
that the student can receive a PHEAA Grant for a future semester and not 
have this semester of attendance count against the student when 
calculating satisfactory academic progress for PHEAA State Student Aid 
Programs. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


STUDENT FINANCIAL SERVICES 
35 STUDENT FINANCIAL SERVICES 


COURSE WITHDRAWAL POLICY 

Students who wish to withdraw from a course after the drop/add period 
for a semester must complete a Class Schedule Form, which is available in 
the Office of the Registrar. Once the student obtains the advisor’s 
signature, the form is returned to the Office of the Registrar for processing. 

Course withdrawals after drop/add will result in a W grade for the course 
and will not change financial aid or tuition charges for that semester 
because they are based on the enrollment status on the census date, which 
is usually the eighth day of the fall or spring semester. Students registered 
for Mini 2 or Mini 4 courses will have a secondary census date after the 
drop/add period for those terms. If changes to enrollment cause the student 
to be less than full time for the semester, aid for the entire semester will be 
recalculated. Students should always consult with SFS prior to withdrawing 
from any course to determine impacts on financial aid. 

Withdrawing from courses may prevent you from making satisfactory 
academic progress, and that may affect your eligibility for future financial 
aid assistance. Please refer to the Satisfactory Academic Progress section for 
details. Whether you choose to withdraw from one course or withdraw 
from the University completely, it is important that you contact the Office of 
Student Financial Services for advice regarding financial aid and billing. 

NOTE: Online courses through OCICU may have different deadlines. 
Please contact the Registrar’s Office for details. 

FINANCIAL AID POLICIES 

Students have the following rights and responsibilities: 

• 
Access to complete information regarding tuition, fees, payment and 
refund policies. 
• 
Confidentiality of all personal and family financial information. 
• 
Reconsideration of student aid eligibility if student and parents 
situation warrants it through an appeal to SFS 
• 
To advise SFS of any additional financial aid received that is not 
indicated on the Mercyhurst Financial Aid Award Letter. 
• 
To follow application filing deadlines and to submit all required 
documentation for verification of financial and other information 
pertaining to the financial aid application process within 30 days of 
the request. 
• 
To give SFS permission to relay pertinent financial, academic and other 
information to donors of aid upon request. 
• 
To maintain Satisfactory Academic Progress (SAP) for Financial Aid 
(refer to SAP Policy in the following section). 
• 
To comply with the rules governing the types of financial assistance 
the student receives. 
Financial Aid Application Procedures and Deadlines 

To apply for federal, state and institutional (Mercyhurst) financial aid, 
the student must complete and submit a Free Application for Federal 
Student Aid (FAFSA®) each academic year. 

Students can submit the FAFSA® using FAFSA® on the Web 
(www.FAFSA.ed.gov). To file electronically, the student (and parent if 
dependent) will need a U.S. Department of Education FSA ID. The FSA ID 
serves as the student’s and/or parents’ electronic signature. Questions about 
the FAFSA® can be answered by calling the Department of Education 
Customer Service Department at 1-800-801-0576. Assistance for students 

with hearing disabilities is available by dialing 1-800-511-5806. 

Although students can file the FAFSA® any time after Oct. 1 for the following 
academic year in which they plan to attend, the priority deadline to file the 
FAFSA® is March 15 of that year to ensure full consideration for federal, state 
and institutional scholarships, grants, loans and work-study. Be sure to 
include Mercyhurst’s institutional code, 003297, in the university choice 
section of the FAFSA®. 

Students may still file the FAFSA®after the deadline of March 15; however, 
they risk not receiving aid from some programs. In addition to the processed 
FAFSA®, SFS must receive all requested documentation within 30 days of the 
request but no later than 30 days before the end of the semester or award 
period. This deadline allows processing and authorization of disbursements 
within timeframes defined by regulations pertaining to federal and state aid 
programs. Failure to apply or to submit required documentation by the 
indicated deadlines may result in a loss of financial aid eligibility for all 
student aid programs. 

Students should be familiar with the SFS processing schedule and adhere to 
the deadlines specified below. 

SFS Processing Schedule and Deadlines 

June 

New students (and parents) attend Summer Orientation. 

New students choose work study jobs online. 

Returning students financial aid packaging begins for those 
registered for the following fall semester. 

Fall bills are sent to students registered for fall courses. 

Upperclassmen SAP appeals for summer are submitted to the 
Financial Aid Satisfactory Academic Progress Committee by 
July 31. 

July 

New students taking Direct Loan, new borrowers, sign 
promissory notes online and complete entrance counseling. 

Parents apply for Federal Direct PLUS Loans or Alternative Loans 
if needed and sign promissory notes. 

Loan exit counseling is completed by student loan 
borrowers expecting to graduate after summer term. 

August 

Fall bills are due Aug. 10, 2016. Payments must be received by 
this date. 

SAP appeals for the fall semester must be submitted to the 
Financial Aid Satisfactory Academic Progress Committee by Aug. 
17, 2016. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


STUDENT FINANCIAL SERVICES 36 STUDENT FINANCIAL SERVICES 


Student employees complete Work-study job requests and 

meet with supervisor to complete I-9 forms. 

September 

Awards are finalized the day after drop/add. 

Financial Aid Refunds are processed and directly deposited. 

October 

Student loan borrowers graduating at the end of the fall 

semester complete loan exit counseling. 

Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA®) is available for 
2017-18 filing by going to www.FAFSA.ed.gov. Mercyhurst 
University must be listed as university choice (school code 
003297) in the university choice section of the FAFSA. 

Awards are finalized for anyone registered for Mini 2. 

November 

All paperwork and loan requests must be submitted by 

mid-November and finalized to receive aid for fall semester. 

December 

Spring bills are sent to students registered for spring courses. 

January 

Mercyhurst University must be listed as a university choice 

(school code 003297) on the school section. 

Spring bills are due Jan. 4, 2017. Payments must be received by 
this date. 

1098 Tax Statements for federal and state income tax filing are 

sent to students that were enrolled prior calendar year. 

SAP appeals for the spring semester must be submitted to the 
Financial Aid Satisfactory Academic Progress Committee by Jan. 
17, 2017. 

February 

Financial Aid Packaging begins for freshman and transfer students. 

March 
FAFSA® preferred filing deadline is March 15; Mercyhurst University 
must be listed as university choice (school code 003297) in the 
university choice section of the FAFSA. 

Federal Income Tax Returns and any other requested information 
must be submitted to the Office of SFS to complete the federal 
financial aid verification process. 

Awards are finalized for anyone registered for Mini 4. 

April 

Loan exit counseling is completed by student loan borrowers 

expecting to graduate after spring semester. 

Summer Financial Aid applications are available in SFS and on 

student portal. 

May 

Admissions Confirmation Deposits are due May 1 for new students. 

FAFSA® filing deadline for PHEAA Grant applicants is May 1. 

Returning student records are reviewed for Satisfactory Academic 
Progress (SAP) after spring semester grades are posted. 

Financial Aid Packaging 

Helping students afford a Mercyhurst education is important to the 
university. Although the primary responsibility for a university education 
rests with a student’s family, there are several sources that can help reduce 
the expense of an education at Mercyhurst. The federal government, state 
government and Mercyhurst all provide various forms of assistance to help 
the student and the family finance the student’s education at Mercyhurst. 
Details on specific student aid programs are available in the Financial Aid 
Awarding Policies section below. 

The student’s Cost of Attendance, Expected Family Contribution and 
Financial Need, which are described below, are the components used to 
determine the student’s financial aid eligibility and to create the 
student’s Financial Aid Package. 

Cost of Attendance (COA) 

Mercyhurst determines the Cost of Attendance (COA), or budget, which is an 
estimate of the educational expenses the student will incur during the 
academic year. These costs include tuition, fees, room, meal plan, 
transportation allowance, books and supplies allowance and miscellaneous 
educational expenses. 

Expected Family Contribution (EFC) 

Expected Family Contribution (EFC) is an estimate of the family’s financial 
strength and the ability to contribute, and it is measured by applying the 
official needs-analysis formula to the data submitted on the student’s 
FAFSA®. 

Financial Need 

Financial need refers to the Cost of Attendance (COA) minus the Expected 
Family Contribution (EFC). Demonstrated Financial Need (COA-EFC=Need) 
determines a student’s eligibility for need-based financial assistance. 

Special Circumstances 

Although the formula to determine financial aid eligibility is standard for 
all applicants, there is some flexibility in recalculating eligibility in light of 
special circumstances. For example, if the student or the student’s family 
has experienced an income reduction due to unemployment, disability, 
divorce or death, the student can have his/her financial aid eligibility 
recalculated using updated information. Please contact the SFS Office at 
814-824-2288 for more information or to schedule an appointment with 
your SFS Counselor. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


STUDENT FINANCIAL SERVICES 
37 STUDENT FINANCIAL SERVICES 


Other special circumstances include loss of non-taxable income (e.g., child 
support, social security benefits, and so on). In all cases, special 
circumstances must be fully documented with tax returns, death 
certificates, court documentation, or letters from appropriate agencies, 
individuals, or employers. 

If there are other circumstances that affect the amount that the student 
and family can contribute toward the student’s education, please contact 
SFS immediately; however, keep in mind that the reasons must be sound 
and that the student will have to provide adequate proof to support any 
adjustments 

Verification & Eligibility Confirmation 

Verification is the process in which Student Financial Services (SFS)—as 
dictated by federal regulations—compares the information reported on the 
FAFSA® with the student’s (and student’s parents) prior-year tax returns and 
other financial documentation. If the student’s application is selected for 
verification, the student will be contacted by letter or email requesting the 
required information. SFS must receive all requested documentation before 
federal, state and institutional aid can be disbursed. If there are differences 
between the data supplied on the FAFSA® and the verification 
documentation, corrections may be needed, and the student’s FAFSA® will 
be reprocessed. This may result in a revision of the Financial Aid Package. 
Failure to submit documents within the requested timeframe will result in 
cancelation of aid. 

If the student is a Pennsylvania resident receiving state aid, PHEAA may 
select the student file for state validation. If the student receives an 
“Applicant Information Request” from the Pennsylvania Higher Education 
Student Assistance Authority (PHEAA), the student must forward all 
requested information and financial documents directly to PHEAA in 
Harrisburg. In some cases, PHEAA may request the same information that 
was requested by SFS. The student must forward this same information 
and documentation to PHEAA to avoid a delay in disbursement of funds or 
loss of your state aid altogether. 

It is extremely important that students (and parents) respond to requests for 
information promptly because finalized financial aid packages are processed 
in the order of file completion date. To ensure that the student’s financial 
aid funds disburse as scheduled at the start of the fall semester, the student 
must be registered for classes, make Satisfactory Academic Progress, and 
submit all required documentation by July 31 prior to the academic year. 
Failure to reply to requests for information will result in cancellation of any 
financial aid offers. Students may still submit late documents, but aid is not 
guaranteed. The absolute deadline for submittal of all documents is 30 days 
prior to the end of the semester or award period the student is enrolled for 
the academic year. The designated deadlines allow SFS to process and 
authorize disbursements within the timeframes permitted under federal 
regulations and university policies. 

Enrollment Status 

As indicated in Financial Aid Awarding Policy section below, each financial 
aid program has specific requirements regarding enrollment status. In 
general, SFS uses the following undergraduate enrollment criteria each 
semester to determine eligibility for the financial aid programs it 
administers: 

CREDITS ENROLLMENT STATUS CLASSIFICATION 

12+ Full time 
9-11 Three-quarter time 
6-8 Half time 
1–5 Less than half time 

Students enrolled in a post-baccalaureate program are considered 
undergraduate students for financial aid purposes. 

A student’s Financial Aid Package is based on full-time enrollment as 
determined on the census date (the morning after drop/add). If the student 
does not have full-time status, financial aid will be adjusted accordingly. 

Students registered for any Mini 2 or Mini 4 courses will have a secondary 
census date after the drop/add period for those terms. If changes to 
enrollment cause the student to be less than full time for the semester, aid 
for the entire semester will be recalculated and in some cases, canceled. If 
canceled aid results in a balance owed to the school, the student must pay 
the balance within 30 days. Failure to resolve an outstanding balance 
within that timeframe may result in the account being placed on hold, 
possible deregistration from future registered courses, and cannot receive 
grades and/or transcripts. 

During the summer session, enrollment status on the second day of the 
summer term determines enrollment status for financial aid eligibility. 
Summer enrollment status follows the same chart above for financial aid 
eligibility. 

Students must consult with SFS if they plan to withdraw from any courses in 
any term. 

Other Eligibility Criteria 

Eligibility for federal student aid is determined on the basis of financial need 
and on several other factors. To receive financial aid from federal programs 
students’ must meet the following criteria: 

• 
File FAFSA® 
• 
Demonstrate financial need where applicable 
• 
Have a high school diploma or its equivalent 
• 
Be admitted to a certificate or degree program and be working toward 
a certificate or degree 
• 
Be a U.S. citizen or eligible non-citizen 
• 
Have a valid Social Security number 
• 
Register with Selective Service (if required) 
• 
Not be in default on a student loan or owe a repayment of federal 
student aid 
• 
Maintain Satisfactory Academic Progress (SAP) once enrolled (refer to 
the Satisfactory Academic Progress Policy for Financial Aid in this 
section of the catalog). 
In addition to most of the federal aid criteria above, eligibility for 
Pennsylvania state assistance programs requires that the student (and 
parents if the student is a dependent) be a legal Pennsylvania resident. 

Enrollment at Other Institutions/Study-Abroad 

Students cannot receive financial aid at multiple institutions for the same 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


STUDENT FINANCIAL SERVICES 38 STUDENT FINANCIAL SERVICES 


courses. A student must declare which institution is to be considered the 
“home school” for financial aid eligibility purposes. If the student has been 
approved to study abroad or to attend another institution during a semester 
to take part or all of his/her educational requirements, the student may 
receive some forms of financial aid for that semester if approved in advance 
and if a Consortium Agreement is executed between Mercyhurst and the 
other institution. Consortium Agreement forms are available in the Office of 
Student Financial Services. 

FINANCIAL AID AWARDING POLICIES 
The Financial Aid Package 

Financial aid at Mercyhurst is awarded according to financial need, merit, 
talent, athletic ability or combination of these factors. If the student is 
eligible for financial assistance based on financial need, the student may 
receive a combination of gift aid (grants or scholarships that need not be 
repaid) and self-help aid (loans, which must be repaid or part-time 
employment on campus). Any combination of awards is referred to as the 
student’s “Financial Aid Package.” Once a Financial Aid Package has been 
awarded, the student can review it at any time throughout the year via Web 
Advisor. 

Eligibility for federal and state grants, as well as some Mercyhurst 
scholarships, is based on the information on the FAFSA® and the general 
eligibility requirements of each program. Gift aid is always awarded before 
self-help aid. If the student has remaining eligibility after gift aid has been 
awarded, the student’s Financial Aid Package may also include work-study 
and student loans. 

If any portion of the financial aid package consists of Federal SEOG, Federal 
work-study, Federal Perkins Loan or Subsidized Stafford Loan, total aid 
(excluding Unsubsidized Stafford Loan, Federal PLUS Loan and Alternative 
Loans), may never exceed a student’s demonstrated financial need. If a 
student receives a financial aid award after the original financial aid package 
is developed and that new award causes an “over award,” some form of 
financial aid assistance will have to be reduced so that the total aid does not 
exceed the student’s demonstrated financial need. In all instances, a 
student’s total financial aid may never exceed the student Cost of 
Attendance (COA). Mercyhurst University usually reduces self-help aid (loans 
and work-study) first, and only if necessary will reduce gift aid (grants and 
scholarships). If gift aid must be reduced, Mercyhurst grants or scholarships 
are adjusted before federal, state or external sources. 

Also, Mercyhurst grants or scholarships are reduced when the total awards 
from Mercyhurst exceed the student’s direct costs. Students may never 
receive a refund of Mercyhurst grants or scholarships in the form of a 
payment. 

Mercyhurst Scholarships & Grants 

Institutional scholarships and grant programs require that students be 
enrolled full time and maintain a minimum Grade Point Average (GPA). 
Most scholarships are renewable each year and students must continue 
to meet the scholarship criteria as described in communication sent 
directly to the student with the financial aid award letter. Students must 
also meet the minimum standards specified in the Satisfactory Academic 
Progress Policy for Financial Aid. 

Other scholarships may be based on athletic ability or talent. Mercyhurst 
offers several scholarships and grants based on financial need. Students are 

required to file the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA®) 
annually to receive Mercyhurst need-based scholarship and grants. 

Note: The following information on the student aid programs is current as of 
the publication date of this academic catalog. Mercyhurst reserves the right to 
change or cancel awards because of regulatory changes, revised allocations, or 
additional information concerning a student’s financial aid eligibility. 
Mercyhurst does not guarantee substitution of funds for any portion of the 
financial aid package, which may be canceled or reduced by government 
agencies or other sources, nor for any portion of the financial aid package 
declined by the student. Awarding is contingent upon program requirements, 
student eligibility and availability of funds. 

In addition to state, federal and private funding sources, Mercyhurst offers 
scholarships to incoming students based on academic merit, financial need 
and athletic and artistic performance to help meet tuition costs. Unless 
otherwise noted, all Mercyhurst University financial aid is automatically 
renewable for four years of study from the student’s start date at 
Mercyhurst. Full time enrollment is required and a student must meet 
Satisfactory Academic Progress each year (discussed fully in the Satisfactory 
Academic Progress section). Egan and some other scholarships may have 
higher GPA renewal requirements. It is the student’s responsibility to know 
the renewal requirements for each scholarship received. 

Mother Borgia Egan Scholarships are awarded to applicants who 
demonstrate a high degree of academic ability. Named for Mercyhurst’s 
foundress and first president, Egan scholarships are among our most 
prestigious awards, ranging from $16,000 to more than $20,000 for some 
students. High school GPA, SAT or ACT test scores, class rank and high school 
coursework are considered in evaluating a student’s qualifications for this 
scholarship. If a student qualifies for other merit-related scholarships (e.g. 
art, dance, music, band), his or her Egan Scholarship may be reduced. This 
scholarship is renewable for four years of study. Egan Scholarships may be 
reduced if a student's GPA falls below 3.0; a student forfeits the award in full 
if his or her GPA falls below 2.5. 

Presidents Grants are awarded to students who show strong potential as 
a Mercyhurst University student, but are unable to afford the cost of tuition. 
These scholarships are central to our mission of ensuring that Mercyhurst 
remains an accessible choice for students. Admissions counselors award 
these scholarships on behalf of President Michael T. Victor. Completion of 
the FAFSA® is required to be considered for this scholarship. 

Athletic Scholarships are awarded by coaches to students who 
demonstrate substantial athletic prowess and potential. Applicants being 
actively recruited by an athletic team should discuss financial aid with the 
coach. Students must meet NCAA eligibility requirements to qualify for 
athletic aid. 

Performance Scholarships are awarded by department faculty to music 
and dance applicants who demonstrate exceptional skill. These awards— 
starting at $750 per year—go to exceptional dance (ballet-focused) and 
music (vocal or instrumental) students. In addition to completing their 
application, students must also audition to be eligible for these awards. If a 
student qualifies for other merit-related scholarships (e.g. art, academic), 
his or her Performance Scholarship may be reduced. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


STUDENT FINANCIAL SERVICES 
39 STUDENT FINANCIAL SERVICES 


Bishop Watson and Sisters of Mercy Heritage Awards of up to $1,000 
are awarded to students enrolling from a Catholic high school (Bishop’s 
award) or Mercy-sponsored, co-sponsored or affiliated high school (Sisters 
award). 

Alumni Legacy Scholarships of up to $1,000 are awarded to applicants 
who are dependents of a Mercyhurst alumnus or alumna. You must note this 
on your application for Mercyhurst to verify in order to qualify for this 
scholarship. 

Rotary Youth Leadership Award Scholarships are available for students 
who attended and completed the Western PA RYLA Conference and applied 
to Mercyhurst by March 1. In addition to applying, applicants should also 
submit a copy of their RYLA completion certificate to the Office of 
Undergraduate Admissions. You must have at least a 3.5 cumulative high 
school GPA at the time of admissions. 

MERCYHURST INTERNAL TRANSFER GRANT (Awards vary; see below) 

Traditional Students with a Degree from the North East Campus 
Two-year scholarships are awarded to students who graduate from the 
North East, Corry or Booker T. Washington campuses and transfer to the Erie 
Campus. 

GPA 
Award Amount 

3.5 – 4.0 
$12,000 per year 
3.0 – 3.49 
$10,800 per year 
2.75 – 2.99 
$ 9,600 per year 
2.5 – 2.74 
$ 8,400 per year 
For North East, Corry or Booker T. Washington students who did not 
graduate but transfer to the Erie Campus with 24-60 credits from those 
campuses, and have at least a 3.0 G.P.A. at both Mercyhurst and their 
respective high school, they may be eligible for up to a $7,200 transfer 
grant. 

Adult Students with a Degree from the North East Campus 

Two-year scholarships are awarded to students who graduate from the 
North East, Corry or Booker T. Washington campuses and transfer to the Erie 
Campus. 

GPA 
Award Amount 

3.5 – 4.0 
$3,600 per year 
2.5 – 3.49 
$3,000 per year 
Mother Catherine McAuley Scholarships are awarded to undergraduate 
students attending the Adult College full-time. A 2.0 minimum GPA is 
required for renewal. This scholarship has been named in honor of Mother 
Catherine McAuley. The heritage of Mercyhurst is traced back to Mother 
Catherine McAuley, who founded the Sisters of Mercy in Dublin, Ireland. 

FEDERAL NEED-BASED GRANTS 

Students must file the FAFSA® and meet eligibility requirements. 

Federal Pell Grant 

Awarded to undergraduate students based on financial need if enrolled 
for at least 3 credits and have not yet received a first bachelor’s degree. 
Students may be enrolled part-time or full-time to receive Pell Grant. 
Dollar amounts awarded depend on the student’s Cost of Attendance 
(COA), Estimated Family Contribution (EFC), total Pell Grants received 
previously, and whether the student plans to attend full time or part time. 
The students EFC is derived from the information provided on the FAFSA®. 

Federal Supplemental Educational Opportunity Grant (SEOG) 

Undergraduate students are eligible to receive SEOG if Pell-eligible, 
pursuing his/her first undergraduate degree, and demonstrate exceptional 
financial need. Because funding is limited, priority is given to applicants 
meeting the March 15 FAFSA® filing deadline. 

STATE GRANTS & SCHOLARSHIPS AND OTHER PROGRAMS 

Pennsylvania Higher Education Assistance Authority Grant (PHEAA) 
Grant 

A student can receive a PHEAA grant if enrolled as an undergraduate at least 
half time pursuing an associate or bachelor’s degree, demonstrate financial 
need, does not have a first bachelor’s degree, and is a legal resident of 
Pennsylvania. The student must also be a high school graduate or a recipient 
of a GED. The Pennsylvania Higher Education Student Assistance Authority 
(PHEAA) determines eligibility and notifies students of any awards through 
a Student Eligibility Notice (SEN); however, before PHEAA Grant can 
disburse, the Office of SFS must confirm the student’s eligibility by certifying 
that all eligibility requirements of the program are met. To be considered 
annually for PHEAA, the state must receive the student’s processed FAFSA® 
by May 1 prior to the academic year applying. 

Aid for Veterans & National Guard Members 

Service to our country may qualify a student for financial assistance in 
pursuing higher education through programs that apply to the situation. 

a. 
Children of Soldiers Declared POW/MIA – PHEAA provides State 
Grants to children of a member of the U.S. Armed Forces who has 
been designated a “Prisoner of War” or as “Missing in Action” and 
served on active duty after Jan. 31, 1955, and was a resident of PA 
for at least 12 months preceding his/her service on active duty. 
Students may obtain the POW-MIA application by calling: 1-800692-
7392 (toll-free); TDD (for hearing-impaired ONLY): 717-7202366. 
b. Montgomery G.I. Bill® – This is a government program; contact the 
Veteran’s Outreach and Enrollment Coordinator at 814-824-2617 for 
more detailed information and assistance applying. GI Bill® is a 
registered trademark of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). 
2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


STUDENT FINANCIAL SERVICES 40 STUDENT FINANCIAL SERVICES 


Pennsylvania National Guard Educational Assistance Program 

Together with the Pennsylvania Department of Military and Veterans 
Affairs (DMVA), PHEAA administers the Educational Assistance Program 
(EAP) for members of the Pennsylvania National Guard. This program 
provides tuition assistance for students who enter into a service 
commitment with the Pennsylvania National Guard, typically for a period 
of six years. To be eligible the student must be a bona fide resident 
(domiciliary) of Pennsylvania and be enrolled in a degree-or certificate-
granting program of study. For additional information call 1-800-GO 
GUARD or visit www.PAGUARD.com. 

Pennsylvania Chafee Education 

PHEAA administers the Pennsylvania Chafee Education Grant Program on 
behalf of the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare. This program is 
authorized under the Foster Care Independence Act of 1999 as amended by 
the Promoting Safe and Stable Families Amendments of 2001. The Chafee 
Education Grant Program offers grant assistance to Pennsylvania 
undergraduate students aging out of foster care who are attending a 
postsecondary institution approved for the Federal Title IV student financial 
assistance programs. To apply for this program, go to: 
http://www.pheaa.org/ special programs/etg_application.pdf or call 1800-
831-0797. 

STUDENT LOANS 

Most students must rely on educational loans to cover at least some 
portion of their educational costs. Educational loans are available to 
undergraduate and graduate students as well as parents of undergraduate 
students. Student loan borrowing is an investment in the student’s future. 
When deciding to borrow, it is very important that students obtain the 
best possible loans available in terms of interest rates and repayment 
options. 

Federal student loans are the most favorable type of educational loans for 
students. Students are advised to get all the federal loans they qualify for 
before considering private educational loans. 

Students are automatically considered for federal student loan eligibility 
when they file the FAFSA®. Amounts may vary based on class level cost of 
attendance, financial need, and other financial aid resources. 

Federal Direct Stafford Loan 

Federal Direct Loans are low-interest loans from the U.S. Department of 
Education that are administered by Mercyhurst University. It is the U.S. 
Department of Education’s major form of self-help aid and is available 
through the William D. Ford Federal Direct Loan Program. There are two 
types of Federal Direct Loans: subsidized and unsubsidized. 

Federal Direct Subsidized Loan 

A Federal Direct Subsidized Loan is available to undergraduate students to 
help meet financial need after other resources are subtracted or to the 
annual maximum loan limit, whichever is lower. Interest begins to accrue 
for the student after the student graduates or ceases to be enrolled at least 
half time. Federal Direct Subsidized Loans have an origination fee that is 
deducted at the time of disbursement. For current interest rates and 
origination fees, please visit www.studentloans.gov. 

Federal Direct Unsubsidized Loan 

A Federal Direct Unsubsidized Loan is not based on the student’s financial 
need. If the student’s Estimated Cost of Attendance is greater than the total 
financial aid and the student has not reached his or her annual maximum 

loan, the student may qualify for Federal Direct Unsubsidized Loan. Students 
are charged interest on this loan from the time the loan is disbursed until it 
is paid in full. Students have the option to pay on the interest while in 
school, or to allow the interest to accumulate, which adds to the principal 
amount of the loan and increases the amount to be repaid. Federal Direct 
Unsubsidized Loans have an origination fee that is deducted at the time of 
disbursement. For current interest rates and origination fees, please visit 
www.studentloans.gov. 

Federal Perkins Loan 

The Federal Perkins loan is available to undergraduate and graduate 
students who demonstrate exceptional financial need and who have already 
exhausted their Federal Direct subsidized loan eligibility for the year. Since 
there is a limited pool of Federal Perkins loan funds each year, these loans 
are awarded first to students who meet the March 15 priority FAFSA® filing 
deadline, prior to the academic year the student plans to attend. Awards 
vary. For more information, please visit 
www.studentaid.ed.gov/types/loans/perkins. 

Students awarded a Federal Perkins loan will be required to electronically 
sign a Federal Perkins Master Promissory Note (MPN) and complete online 
Entrance Counseling. 

As a recipient of a Federal Perkins loan offer, the student will be sent a 
letter directing him or her to a website to complete the Perkins promissory 
note and loan disclosure. Perkins loan cannot be disbursed to the student’s 
account until the Federal Perkins MPN is signed. Once a Federal Perkins 
Loan MPN is completed and the loan is disbursed to the student by 
Mercyhurst University, the student does not have to sign Federal Perkins 
Loan MPN again (it is valid for 10 years). 

There are no insurance premiums or origination fees charged for this loan. 
Interest does not accrue while the student is enrolled at least half-time. 
Students have a nine-month grace period, which begins when the student 
graduates or ceases to be enrolled at least half time. At the end of the grace 
period, students begin repayment to Mercyhurst University. The fixed 
interest rate of 5 percent begins when the student goes into repayment and 
the monthly payments are calculated for full repayment within 10 years 
(120 months) or $40 monthly, whichever is greater. 

STUDENT EMPLOYMENT PROGRAMS 

Mercyhurst offers programs that allow students to earn money to help 
finance university expenses and acquire practical work experience through 
part-time employment. The student must be accepted into a degree-
granting program and be attending classes to apply for such jobs. Student-
employment programs provide on-campus jobs in many academic 
disciplines and administrative offices for eligible students. Students may be 
eligible to participate in the following programs: 

• Federal Work-Study (FWS) Program: may be available if the 
student is an undergraduate, U. S. citizen or permanent resident, and has an 
FWS allocation as part of the student’s Financial Aid Package. Students can 
earn up to the amount specified in the Financial Aid Award Letter. FWS 
employment also includes community-service tutoring and literacy-project 
positions. FWS earnings are excluded from income on the student’s 
subsequent year’s financial aid application (FAFSA®). 
Institutional Employment (IE) Program: provides on-campus employment 
opportunities for Mercyhurst students who demonstrate financial need. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


STUDENT FINANCIAL SERVICES 41 STUDENT FINANCIAL SERVICES 


Students must be enrolled full-time to qualify for Institutional Employment. 
SFS will contact students who were awarded student employment directly 
for job placement. 

SATISFACTORY ACADEMIC PROGRESS POLICY FOR FINANCIAL AID 

All students must be making satisfactory academic progress at Mercyhurst 
University to establish and retain eligibility for student financial aid. 
Mercyhurst monitors satisfactory academic progress (SAP) after the spring 
semester to provide students with early notification of their academic 
progress status for financial aid eligibility. The student’s entire academic 
history will be considered when determining the academic progress status, 
including accepted transfer credits from another university. 

Mercyhurst must apply two different Satisfactory Academic Policy 
standards depending on the type and sources of funding. The two SAP 
Policies are as follows: 

1. Institutional and Federal Student Aid 
2. Pennsylvania State Grants and Scholarships 
The following standards explain the components to the 
Financial Aid Satisfactory Academic Progress Policy. 

INSTITUTIONAL AND FEDERAL STUDENT AID 
QUANTITATIVE MEASURE Credit Hour Programs: Students must 
complete a minimum number of credits toward graduation requirements 
each academic year in which they are enrolled at Mercyhurst. The 
quantitative measurement for academic progress compares the credits 
attempted to credits passed. Students must complete at least 67.00% of 
cumulative credits attempted to be considered making satisfactory 
academic progress. To calculate credits completed, all courses taken by the 
student will be counted, including credits which transferred into Mercyhurst 
along with all remedial courses. 

QUALITATIVE MEASURE 

Upperclassmen must have a 2.00 cumulative GPA by the end of the 
academic year. SAP will be evaluated at the end of the spring semester. 
Specific Mercyhurst scholarships and grants may have different grade point 
requirements for continued eligibility. This is a separate and distinct factor 
in renewing or continuing eligibility for certain institutional scholarships 
and grants. The grade point requirement for specific programs supersedes 
the grade point average requirement referenced above. Information on the 
terms and conditions of specific institutional awards is made at the time of 
the grant/scholarship offer. 

An undergraduate student is considered to be making Satisfactory Academic 
Progress for both institutional and federal aid if he/she meets the following 
criteria: 

Academic 
Year 
(Evaluated 
at 
end 
of 
Spring 
semester) 
Percentage 
of 
all 
Attempted 
Hours 
required 
to 
be 
completed* 
Minimum 
Cumulative 
GPA 
Required* 
1 
67.00% 
2.00 
2 
67.00% 
2.00 
3 
67.00% 
2.00 
4 
67.00% 
2.00 
5 
67.00% 
2.00 
6 
67.00% 
2.00 


*Completion 
Rate 
and 
GPA 
are 
not 
rounded 
up 


Any student who was registered for courses during the academic year but 
has not received federal or institutional aid in the current academic year will 
still be reviewed for SAP to determine future eligibility for awards. A 
student must be making SAP to receive federal, state, and institutional 
funds. 

MAXIMUM TIME FRAME FOR COMPLETION 

The maximum time frame a student may attend and continue aid eligibility 
cannot exceed 150 percent of the published length of the student’s 
academic program measured in cumulative attempted credits. For example, 
the published length of a four-year program is 121 credit hours. Therefore, 
the full-time student has a maximum of 180 attempted credit hours to 
complete the program. When the student’s enrollment exceeds the 150 
percent point, the student is no longer eligible for federal financial aid. 

Important note: there is a four-consecutive year maximum time limit to 
receive institutional scholarships and grants for new freshmen. Some 
awards are for two years only and it will be specified in your original 
admissions packet. Transfer student maximum time limit will be adjusted 
by the equivalent semesters of transfer credits. 

All credits the student attempts, including credits transferred into 
Mercyhurst University, count toward the 150 percent requirement even if 
the student changes majors or campus locations. If a student is pursuing 
two programs simultaneously, the program requiring the most credits to 
complete will be used to measure the maximum time frame for 
completion. 

EFFECT OF WITHDRAWALS, INCOMPLETE COURSES, AND REPEATED 
COURSES 

If a student withdraws from a course or courses (W grade) after the first 
week of classes during a given semester, the credits are included in the 
count of courses attempted. An incomplete course counts as credits 
attempted, but is not included in the GPA and credits completed until the 
incomplete grade changes to a passing or failing grade. A repeated course 
is only counted toward progression if it replaces a previous course for 
which the student received no credit. 

PROCEDURES FOR APPEALING 

Students not meeting the minimum standards for Satisfactory Academic 
Progress described above are ineligible for federal and institutional 
financial aid (this includes grants, scholarships, work and loans). 
However, students may request reinstatement of their financial aid 
eligibility by submitting a written appeal to the Financial Aid Appeals 
Committee. SAP Appeal requests must provide an explanation of the 
extenuating circumstances that contributed to the student’s failure to 
meet the minimum academic progress standards and a realistic academic 
plan for improvement. If the Financial Aid Appeals Committee approves 
the appeal, the student’s financial aid eligibility is reinstated for the 
applicable payment periods. Students should also meet with their 
academic support counselor for guidance on their academic plans 
throughout the academic year. 

Students receive appeal results in writing. The decision of the Financial Aid 
Appeals Committee is final and cannot be further appealed. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


STUDENT FINANCIAL SERVICES 42 STUDENT FINANCIAL SERVICES 


DEADLINES TO APPEAL for SAP 

Summer Term: July 31, 2016 
Fall Semester: Aug. 17, 2016 
Spring Semester: first day of spring classes as defined by OAA 

PENNSYLVANIA (PHEAA) STATE GRANTS AND SCHOLARSHIPS 

The progress review for all state grants and scholarships will occur at the 
end of the spring semester. Before crediting a state grant or scholarship to 
a student’s account, Mercyhurst must certify that for the last academic year 
during which the student received a state grant, the student completed 
the minimum required credits hours for the semester to which grant aid 
was applied. 

For example, if the student received an equivalent of an academic year 
state grant award during the prior academic year, the student is 
expected to have completed successfully 24 credits over the course of 
the prior academic year and summer. 

If the student has received at least one semester of state grant aid during 
a prior academic year, Mercyhurst must verify that, during or subsequent 
to those semesters, the student completed the minimum number of 
semester credits/clock hours needed to make academic progress given 
the number of semesters of state grant aid received and the student 
state grant award status (full-time or part-time) during each of those 
semesters. 

The following table is used in determining the minimum number of 
credits/clock hours that must be successfully completed for each enrollment 
status during a semester of state grant aid. It is necessary to add the award 
counters (according to the student’s specific enrollment and award status) 
for each semester of the academic year in order to determine the minimum 
total number of credits/clock hours that must have been completed by the 
student for the academic year period in question. 

Credits successfully completed at the previous institution need not be 
transferable to Mercyhurst to be counted for academic progress. 

EFFECTS OF REPEATED COURSEWORK AND INCOMPLETE COURSES 

Repeated coursework may only be counted once toward the state aid 
grant/scholarship academic progress requirement. 

In the case of students who were permitted a prior semester of state grant 
on the basis of the remedial exception, only those remedial credits which 
were counted toward the full-time/half-time minimum may be considered 
part of the credits needed to meet the academic progress test for that period 
of time. 

PROCEDURES FOR APPEALING 

In cases where the student has failed to complete the required number of 
credits to satisfy the academic progress test as a result of a medical 
condition, family illness, or other extenuating circumstances, such can be 
report to PHEAA on an individual basis for their review and approval. The 
academic progress exception form is available at 
www.pheaa.org/stategrants/forms.shtml. This medical exception form 
must be submitted with appropriate documentation to the office of SFS for 
approval before it is forwarded to PHEAA. 

DEADLINES TO APPEAL 

The State Grant Progress Exception Form must be submitted within 30 days 
after the start of the semester and will never be accepted after April 1 by 
PHEAA. 

FOR EACH 
AWARD 
COUNTER 
STUDENT MUST COMPLETE 
MINIMUM OF: 
Full-time semester 
award 
.50 
12 semester credits/ 450 clock 
hours 
Full-time trimester/ 
quarter award 
.33/.34 
12 qtr. or 8 semester credits/ 
300 clock hours 
Part-time semester 
award 
.25 
6 semester credits/ 225 clock 
hours 
Part-time quarter 
award 
.16/.17 
6 qtr. or 4 semester credits/ 150 
clock hours 

State aid grant/scholarship recipients who fail to meet the requirements 
above remain ineligible until the requisite credits have been completed. 

TRANSFER STUDENTS 

All of the student’s coursework, whether it was taken at Mercyhurst 
or elsewhere, is applicable when performing the academic progress 
test for state aid. 

Transfer students that were prior year recipients of a state grant must 
have their official academic transcript from their prior institution 
submitted to the Mercyhurst Admissions Office so that academic 
progress may be reviewed by the Office of Student Financial Services. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Anthropology/Archaeology 43 Anthropology/Archaeology 

Anthropology/Archaeology 
DEPARTMENT CHAIR 


Mary Ann Owoc, Ph.D. 

FACULTY 

Professor: 

Dennis C. Dirkmaat, Ph.D., D-ABFA 
(Chairperson of Applied Forensic Sciences) 

Associate Professors: 

Ruth Burgett Jolie, Ph.D. 
Stephen Ousley, Ph.D. 
Mary Ann Owoc, Ph.D. 


Assistant Professors: 

Heather Garvin, Ph.D. 
Edward A. Jolie, Ph.D. 


Instructors: 

Allison Byrnes, M.A.; Luis L. Cabo-Perez, M.S ; Allen Quinn, B.A. 
Kristina Altes, Ph.D. 


Adjunct Faculty: 

Jamie Borowicz, Ph.D. 
Frank Vento, Ph.D. 


Laboratory Directors/Instructors: 

Allison Byrnes, M.A. (Lithic); Luis L. Cabo-Perez, M.S. (Forensic and 
Bioarchaeology); Annie Marjenin, M.S. (Curation and Conservation); 
Edward Jolie, Ph.D. (Perishable Analysis); Allen Quinn, B.A. 
(Ceramics) 

Project Archaeologist: 

Allen Quinn, B.A. 

INTRODUCTION 

Anthropologists (including specialists in archaeology) are scientists who 
investigate human diversity in the past and present. Today’s anthropologists 
are interested in applying insights from the study of human cultural, 
biological and linguistic diversity and change to contribute to contemporary 
global issues. Our graduates are trained in critical thinking, pattern 
recognition, problem solving, qualitative and quantitative analysis, and 
intercultural skills. Job diversity is a hallmark of careers in anthropology. 
Anthropologists work not just in exotic field locations but urban settings, 
corporate firms, museums, government jobs, non-profits, and a wide range 
of social-and community-focused arenas. Mercyhurst University’s program 
in Anthropology/Archaeology is characterized by hands-on training in 
current field and laboratory methods and theory with highly individualized 
mentoring. We prepare students to design and execute original research 
studies and become leaders in their field. Students regularly participate in 
faculty research projects with opportunities for professional development, 

such as conference presentations and peer-reviewed publications. They also 
acquire real-world experience and training through our professional 
partnerships. 

Anthropology is a broad field that integrates with other disciplines. The 
Department of Anthropology/Archaeology also has a special relationship 
with the Biology, Applied Forensic Sciences, Geology, and History 
Departments. Our students take course in these departments in fulfillment 
of their concentrations and double-major or minor in these subject areas. 

MISSION STATEMENT 

Our department is committed to the education and training of the next 
generation of anthropologists and archaeologists. As a four-field discipline 
concerned with the cultural and biological expressions of humanity past and 
present, anthropology is a diverse endeavor characterized by approaches 
and methodologies drawn from both the sciences and the humanities. 
Therefore, a wide range of core information, concepts, methodologies, as 
well as the ability to mobilize these resources critically and independently, 
form the skill set that we strive to impart to our students. 

PROGRAM STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 

Demonstrate knowledge of the fundamental concepts and field/laboratory 
methods in Anthropology/Archaeology. 

Demonstrate effective communication skills, including oral and written 
presentations of synthesized/analyzed Anthropological/Archaeological 
materials and literature. 

Distinguish, synthesize, and evaluate the theoretical and ethical 
underpinnings of Anthropology or Archaeology. 

Critically apply Anthropological/Archaeological concepts and data to new 
contexts. 

Design and conduct Anthropological research using appropriate techniques 
and procedures. 

REQUIREMENTS 

The Department of Anthropology/Archaeology offers courses leading to 
Bachelor of Arts (B.A.) or Bachelor of Science (B.S.) degrees in 
Anthropology/Archaeology. Students may follow a general B.A. course of 
study, or specialize in one of 3 concentrations in a B.A. or B.S. track. 
Students seeking a B.S. in Anthropology/Archaeology may pursue this via an 
Archaeology, or a Bioarchaeology concentration. All 
Anthropology/Archaeology students complete 8 required departmental core 
courses (25 credits), Statistics for the Natural Sciences (3 credits), and 
successfully complete the intermediate level of a foreign language (9 
credits). 

Students seeking a general B.A. in Anthropology/Archaeology must 
complete an additional 2-3 required departmental methods/materials 
courses (6-14 credits), Physical Geology/Lab (4 credits), and 5 additional 
Anthropology/Archaeology courses numbered above 200. 

Students seeking a B.A. with an Archaeology concentration must 
complete an additional 6 courses (22 credits), Physical Geology/Lab (4 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Anthropology/Archaeology 44 Anthropology/Archaeology 

credits), and 2 additional Anthropology/Archaeology courses numbered Archaeology concentration) 
above 200. Cognates (see below) 
2 additional Anthropology/Archaeology courses numbered above 200 
Students Seeking a B.A. with a Sociocultural concentration must complete 
an additional 6 courses (21 credits), and 3 additional 
Anthropology/Archaeology courses numbered above 200. 
Students seeking a B.S. with an Archaeology concentration must 
complete an additional courses (30-31 credits), Physical Geology/Lab (4 
credits), and 2 additional Anthropology/Archaeology courses numbered 
above 200. 
Students seeking a B.S. with a Bioarchaeology concentration must 
complete an additional 10 courses (31 credits) and Human Biology/Lab (4 
credits). 
All Anthropology/Archaeology majors must maintain an overall 2.75 GPA, 
and a 3.0 GPA in Anthropology/ Archaeology major courses. Grades of D or 
lower will have to be repeated. Students will be evaluated in the summer 
following their sophomore year. Students failing to achieve the minimum 
GPA will receive a degree of General Science. 
REQUIRED DEPARTMENTAL CORE COURSES 
ANTH 107 Language and Culture 3 credits 
ANTH 112 World Cultures 3 credits 
ANTH 130/131 Archaeology & Lab 4 credits 
ANTH 120/121 Physical Anthropology & Lab 4 credits 
ANTH 336 History of Anthropological Theory 3 credits 
ANTH 347 Anthropological Ethics 3 credits 
ANTH 390 Research Design 2 credits 
ANTH 490 Senior Thesis 3 credits 
REQUIRED COURSES 
B.A. Anthropology/Archaeology, B.A./B.S. Archaeology 
Concentration: 
ANTH 107 Language and Culture 3 credits 
ANTH 112 World Cultures 3 credits 
ANTH 130/131 Archaeology & Lab 4 credits 
ANTH 120/121 Physical Anthropology & Lab 4 credits 
ANTH 336 History of Anthropological Theory 3 credits 
ANTH 347 Anthropological Ethics 3 credits 
ANTH 390 Research Design 2 credits 
ANTH 490 Senior Thesis 3 credits 
ANTH 219 Archaeological Concepts 3 credits 
ANTH 224/225 Archaeological Field Methods and Lab 4 credits 
ANTH226 Summer Archaeological Field Training 6 credits 
ANTH 332 or 338 Materials Analysis 3-4 credits 
or 
ANTH 238/239 Analytical Lab Methods Historic and Lab 4 credits 
ANTH338 Introduction to Archaeological Theory 3 credits 
(B.A./B.S. Archaeology Concentration) 

Area /Thematic Study 

ANTH 200, 201, 206, 207, 208, 209, 213, 214, 205) (B.A./B.S. 3 credits 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Anthropology/Archaeology 45 Anthropology/Archaeology 

B.S. Bioarchaeology Concentration: 
ANTH 270 Paleoanthropology I 3 credits 
ANTH 272 Paleoanthropology II 3 credits 
ANTH224/225 Archaeological Field Methods and Lab 4 credits 
ANTH226 Summer Archaeological Field Training 6 credits 
ANTH250/251 Zooarchaeology/and Lab 4 credits 
ANTH326/327 Human Osteology/and Lab 4 credits 
ANTH333/334 Human Skeletal Biology and Lab 4 credits 
ANTH357 Bioarchaeology 3 credits 
ANTH240 Human Adaptation 3 credits 
ANTH 375 Human Variation 3 credits 

B.A. Sociocultural Concentration: 
ANTH227 Ethnographic Field Methods 3 credits 
ANTH228 Ethnographic Field Methods II 3 credits 
ANTH/ANTH352 Ethnographic Perspectives 3 credits 
1 Ethnographic Course (ANTH 202, 203, 216, 220, 300) 3 credits 
2 Thematic Courses (ANTH 344, 345, 346, 348, 349) 6 credits 
3 additional Anthropology/Archaeology courses numbering above 200 9 
credits 

COGNATE COURSES: 

MATH139 Statistics for Sciences 3 credits 
Foreign Language 9 credits 
GEOL 100/102 Physical Geology and Lab (BA and BA/BS 

Archaeology Concentration 
BIO 120/121 Human Biology/Lab (BS Bioarchaeology 4 credits 
Concentration) 
GEO 342/343 Sedimentation and Stratigraphy & Lab (BS 4 credits 
Archaeology Concentration) 
GEOL 215/216 Geomorphology and Lab (BS Archaeology 4 credits 

Concentration) 
ANTH/GEOL Geoarchaeology and Lab (BS Archaeology 4 credits 
430/431 Concentration) 
or 
GEOL 306/307 Soils and Lab ((BS Archaeology 4 credits 

Concentration) 

ADDITIONAL AVAILABLE ELECTIVES (not named above): 
ANTH200 Prehistory of Eastern North America 3 credits 
ANTH201 Prehistory of Western North America 3 credits 
ANTH202 Indians of Eastern North America 3 credits 
ANTH203 Indians of Western North America 3 credits 
ANTH204 Cultures in Contact 3 credits 
ANTH205 Historic Archaeology 3 credits 
ANTH207 Mesoamerican Prehistory 3 credits 
ANTH208 Early European Prehistory 3 credits 
ANTH209 Later European Prehistory 3 credits 
ANTH212 Biblical Archaeology 3 credits 
ANTH 213 Prehistory of the Near East 3 credits 
ANTH214 Far Eastern Prehistory 3 credits 
ANTH215 Iroquoian Prehistory 3 credits 
ANTH216 Plants and People 3 credits 
ANTH300 Hunters and Gatherers 3 credits 
ANTH301 Origins of Food Production 3 credits 
ANTH302 Rise of Civilization 3 credits 
ANTH311 Perspectives on the Pleistocene 3 credits 

ANTH332 Perishables Analysis 3 credits 
ANTH324 Instrumentation Field Methods 3 credits 
ANTH328 Primitive Technology 3 credits 
ANTH340 Principles of Evolution 3 credits 
ANTH342 Funerary Archaeology 3 credits 

ANTH344 Anthropology of Ritual 3 credits 
ANTH345 Anthropology of Religion 3 credits 
ANTH346 Anthropology of Gender 3 credits 
ANTH348 Urban Anthropology 3 credits 
ANTH349 Anthropology of the Family 3 credits 
ANTH360 Archaeological Report Preparation 3 credits 
ANTH362 Archaeological Management 3 credits 

ANTHROPOLOGY/ 
ARCHAEOLOGY MINOR: 

ANTH107 Language and Culture 3 credits 
ANTH112 World Cultures 3 credits 
ANTH120/121 Physical Anthropology and Lab 4 credits 
ANTH130/131 Archaeology and Lab 4 credits 
Four additional Anthropology/Archaeology courses numbered above 200. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


APPLIED FORENSIC SCIENCES 46 APPLIED FORENSIC SCIENCES 


APPLIED FORENSIC SCIENCES 

BACHELOR OF SCIENCE 

DEPARTMENT CHAIR 

Dennis C. Dirkmaat, Ph.D., D-ABFA 

FACULTY 

Professor of Applied Forensic Sciences and Professor of 
Anthropology: 


Dennis C. Dirkmaat, Ph.D., D-ABFA 

Assistant Professor of Anthropology 

Heather M. Garvin, Ph.D. 

Forensic Laboratory Director and Director of Student 
Research: 


Luis L. Cabo-Perez, M.S. 

Associate Professor of Chemistry: 

Clinton D. Jones, Ph.D. 

Adjunct Faculty: 

Sgt. Dennis P. Donovan, PSP, ret. 
Mercyhurst University 


Gregory O. Olsen, M.S., Investigator 
Office of the Fire Marshall, 
Ontario, Canada 


Consultant: 

Arthur W. Young, B.S., 
Guardian Forensic Sciences, 
Abington, PA 


INTRODUCTION 

Forensic science involves the utilization of the natural, physical, and social 
sciences in the multidisciplinary investigation of matters related to society 
and the law. Activities of relevance to forensic science range from the 
location, documentation and collection of physical evidence at the crime 
scene to the analysis and interpretation of that evidence in the laboratory. 
Many diverse fields are included in the forensic sciences. 

The development of the Applied Forensic Sciences Program represents the 
first multidisciplinary science major at Mercyhurst that incorporates all 
major natural science fields in the core curriculum. 

Three concentrations are available to the students in the Bachelor of Applied 
Forensic Sciences degree: Criminalistics/Forensic Biology, Forensic 
Anthropology and Forensic Chemistry. 

Supported by the nationally recognized undergraduate and master’s 
program in forensic anthropology, the particular strength of the Applied 
Forensic Sciences program will continue to reside in the recognition and 
documentation of physical evidence at the outdoor crime scene, whether 
that crime scene involves a surface scatter of human remains, a buried body 
feature, a fatal fire site or a large-scale mass fatality incident. 

The undergraduate curriculum consists of a core of courses spanning 
anthropology, biology, chemistry, physics, geology and mathematics. The 
variety of courses available in this curriculum will meet the diverse student 
interests while reflecting the changing face of forensic science. 

The program and curriculum focuses on presenting state-of-the-art 
techniques in forensic science in the classroom while providing a multitude 
of practical, hands-on opportunities in the laboratory and the field. 

MISSION STATEMENT 

The Mercyhurst University Department of Applied Forensic Sciences offers a 
multidisciplinary major dedicated to educating students in matters related 
to science, forensic science, society and the law. Students receive a solid 
natural science education, bolstered by the thematic forensic science 
courses. The program advances the student’s knowledge of science-based 
forensic fields of study by advocating critical thinking and problem-solving 
skills. Classroom learning is strengthened by strong, hands-on components 
of many courses. The Applied Forensic Sciences Department stresses the 
importance of reasonable and ethical behavior in regard to the field of 
forensic science to all members of the department. 

PROGRAM STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 

Students will be able to recognize, employ and perform the basic and 
advanced principles, methods and practices of the various forensic science 
disciplines. 

Students will have the ability to identify, collect, analyze and interpret 
forensic evidence. 

Students will be able to critically analyze and interpret past and current 
research in the forensic sciences. 

Students will display comprehensive scientific writing skills. 

CONCENTRATION DESCRIPTIONS 

Criminalistics/Forensic Biology 

Criminalists are typically called upon to locate, document, preserve, analyze, 
interpret and testify with respect to the significance of physical evidence. 
They must possess extensive skills and training in many diverse fields of 
natural and physical sciences. Pattern recognition in fingerprints and 
ballistics, and the interpretation of organic and inorganic evidence such as 
hairs, fibers, paints, polymers, soil, glass and other trace materials is 
important. Competency in the methods for collection and preservation of 
human biological evidence in regard to DNA testing is stressed in lecture and 
in the laboratory. Forensic Biologists apply life science disciplines to legal 
investigations including genetics, entomology, microbiology, ecology, and 
botany. Genetics is an important part of the field and is often used to 
confirm the identity of biological organisms. This concentration prepares 
students for entry-level positions as crime scene technicians; advanced 
training in criminalistics and DNA analysis; and as trainees in forensic science 
laboratories. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


APPLIED FORENSIC SCIENCES 47 APPLIED FORENSIC SCIENCES 


Forensic Anthropology 

Forensic anthropologists are often called upon to comprehensively analyze 
human skeletal remains from a variety of crime scenes, ranging from surface 
scatters to mass fatalities. The skills of physical anthropology and 
archaeology are paramount to the training of competent forensic 
anthropologists and the program uniquely prepares students for graduate 
studies in biological, physical and forensic anthropology. Mercyhurst’s 
undergraduate program is the only one in the United States with a Forensic 
Anthropology concentration. The department includes a board-certified 
forensic anthropologist and conducts approximately one hundred forensic 
cases a year. Upperclassmen are provided opportunities to work with both 
faculty and forensic anthropology master’s students on a number of these 
cases both in the field and in the laboratory. This concentration prepares 
students for advanced studies in anthropology, death investigation 
positions and positions in medical examiner’s offices. 

Forensic Chemistry 

Forensic chemists analyze the chemical aspects of evidence that is collected 
from crime scenes and rarely conduct investigative work themselves. Their 
job is to identify and characterize physical and biological evidence as part of 
the larger process of solving a crime. Evidence is often in trace amounts and 
may include hair, paint, gunshot residue, inks, fibers, fire debris, explosives, 
drug residue, and blood. A fully developed knowledge in the natural 
sciences, specifically in analytical chemistry and instrumental methods, is 
required. This concentration prepares students for entry-level toxicology 
laboratory positions and advanced studies in forensic chemistry and forensic 
science. 

APPLIED FORENSIC SCIENCES BACHELOR OF SCIENCE REQUIREMENTS 

The Applied Forensic Sciences program offers courses leading to the 
Bachelor of Science (B.S.) degree in Applied Forensic Sciences with 
concentrations in Criminalistics/Forensic Biology, Forensic Anthropology and 
Forensic Chemistry. Students seeking the Applied Forensic Sciences, 
Bachelor of Science degree are required to take the courses and credits in 
the curriculum as outlined below. Credits from short courses and seminars 
(1-2 credits) at other universities and research institutions may be used to 
complete credit requirements following approval by the program 
chairperson and dean of the college. 

Students must maintain a grade point average of 2.75 overall and in the 
major. No required courses in the major may be taken on a Pass-Fail basis. 
Students who earn a grade less than a C in a required major course must 
repeat the course. Only a Pass (PA) will be accepted in the repeated course. 
Only two courses in the major may be repeated, either the same course or 
two different courses. No third repeat of any kind will be accepted. The 
necessity to repeat a third course will result in disenrollment from the 
program. 

All prerequisites must be met before continuing in the course curriculum 
sequence. Alteration of the course prerequisites will only be made by special 
permission of the department chairperson. 

The department chairperson shall conduct an annual review of the academic 
progress of all students enrolled in the program. All students in the program 
will also undergo a review by the department faculty at the completion of 
their sophomore level in their area of concentration. Students must 
successfully complete the Sophomore Review in order to continue their 
studies in the Applied Forensic Sciences Department. Continuance in the 

Applied Forensic Sciences program is based on the following criteria: 1) a 
minimum overall GPA of 2.75 in courses taken in the major concentration, 2) 
a minimum overall University GPA of 2.75, and 3) professional conduct of 
the students. If a student does not pass the Sophomore Review, the student 
will not be allowed to enroll in any further courses required for programs 
administered by the Applied Forensic Sciences Department. The Sophomore 
Review is encouraged in order to ensure that the students initiate personal 
assessments of their academic and career goals through a dialogue with the 
Applied Forensic Sciences Department faculty. 

Students eligible for Sophomore Review in the Forensic Anthropology 
concentration must have completed or be in the process of completing: 
Physical Anthropology/Lab, General Chemistry II/Lab and Calculus I. 

Students eligible for Sophomore Review in the Criminalistics/Forensic 
Biology and Forensic Chemistry concentrations must have completed, or be 
in the process of completing: Cell Biology/Lab, Organic Chemistry II/Lab and 
Calculus I. 

Students whose GPA falls below 2.75 will be placed on probation or dis-
enrolled from the program, depending on the outcome of the Sophomore 
Review. 

Training and working in the forensic science field requires a high level of 
security and confidentiality. Professional conduct and confidentiality is 
expected of all students as to information received in the classroom, as well 
as information received and any evidentiary materials handled in the 
laboratory facilities. Communicating confidential information 
inappropriately, carelessly or negligently is considered a breach of 
confidentiality and may result in disciplinary review and action as set forth 
by the Applied Forensic Sciences Department. 

Students must be aware that future employment often requires intensive 
background investigations and drug testing. Any conduct deemed 
significantly unethical, illegal or unprofessional may result in that student 
failing to achieve employment in the field, regardless of his/her academic 
record. 

APPLIED FORENSIC SCIENCES CONCENTRATIONS 

Students should choose one concentration of study by the middle of their 
sophomore year. 

REQUIRED COURSES 
FORENSIC ANTHROPOLOGY CONCENTRATION 

BIO 142/143 Cellular and Molecular Biology/Lab 4 credits 
BIO 146/147 Ecology and Evolutionary Biology of 4 credits 

Organisms/ Lab 
BIO 310/311 Genetics & Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 121/122 General Chemistry I/Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 131/132 General Chemistry II/Lab 4 credits 
GEO 100/102 Physical Geology/Lab 4 credits 
PHYS 201/203 General Physics I/Lab 4 credits 
MATH 170 Calculus I 4 credits 
FRSC 150/151 Introduction to the Forensic 4 credits 

Sciences/Lab 
FRSC 310 Statistics for Forensic Science and 3 credits 

Anthropology 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


APPLIED FORENSIC SCIENCES 48 APPLIED FORENSIC SCIENCES 


FORENSIC ANTHROPOLOGY CONCENTRATION CRIMINALISTICS/FORENSIC BIOLOGY CONCENTRATION 

ANTH 120/121 Physical Anthropology/Lab 4 credits BIO 146/147 Ecology and Evolutionary Biology of 4 credits 
ANTH 130/131 Archaeology/Lab 4 credits Organisms Lab 
ANTH 242 Forensic Anthropology 3 credits BIO 310/311 Genetics & Lab 4 credits 
ANTH 250/251 Zooarchaeology/Lab 4 credits BIO 370/371 Cellular Biochemistry Lab 4 credits 
ANTH 270 Paleoanthropology I 3 credits BIO 430 Molecular Biology 3 credits 
ANTH 272 Paleoanthropology II 3 credits *Plus 4 additional elective courses, one of which MUST 13 credits 
ANTH 326/327 Human Osteology I/Lab 4 credits have a lab. 
ANTH 333/334 Human Skeletal Biology II/Lab 4 credits 
FRSC 390/391 Crime Scene Archaeology/Lab 4 credits ADDITIONAL ELECTIVE COURSES 
FRSC 480 Senior Seminar in Forensic 3 credits BIO 200/201 Microbiology/Lab 4 credits 

Anthropology BIO 240/241 Human Anatomy & Physiology I/Lab 4 credits 
Plus two (2) additional elective courses 8 credits BIO 244/245 Histology/Lab 4 credits 

BIO 250/251 Human Anatomy & Physiology II/Lab 4 credits 
ADDITIONAL ELECTIVE COURSES BIO 320/321 Comparative Vertebrate 4 credits 
ANTH 224/225 Archaeological Field Methods/Lab 4 credits Anatomy/Lab 
ANTH 347 Anthropological Ethics 3 credits BIO 334/335 Human Anatomy/Lab 4 credits 
BIO 240/241 Human Anatomy and Physiology I/Lab 4 credits BIO 344/345 Human Physiology/Lab 4 credits 
BIO 244/245 Histology/Lab 4 credits BIO 360/361 Systems Physiology/Lab 4 credits 
BIO 250/251 Human Anatomy and Physiology II/Lab 4 credits BIO 448 Population Genetics 3 credits 
BIO 320/321 Comparative Vertebrate Anatomy/Lab 4 credits FRSC 250 Forensic Photography 3 credits 
BIO 334/335 Human Anatomy/Lab 4 credits FRSC 320 Indoor Crime Scene Investigation 3 credits 
BIO 344/345 Human Physiology/Lab 4 credits FRSC 360 Forensic Chemistry 3 credits 
BIO 360/361 Systems Physiology/Lab 4 credits FRSC 410 Death Investigation 3 credits 
BIO 430 Molecular Biology 3 credits FRSC 460 Fire Science and Arson 3 credits 
BIO 448 Population Genetics 3 credits * The department chair may consider other courses for elective approval. 
FRSC 250 Forensic Photography 3 credits 
FRSC 320 Indoor Crime Scene Investigation 3 credits FORENSIC CHEMISTRY CONCENTRATION 
FRSC 340 Physical Evidence and the Law 3 credits CHEM 230 Quantitative Analysis 3 credits 

FRSC 360 Forensic Chemistry 3 credits CHEM 331/331 Biochemistry I/Lab 4 credits 
FRSC 410 Death Investigation 3 credits CHEM 333/334 Instrumental Analysis/Lab 4 credits 
FRSC 460 Fire Science and Arson 3 credits CHEM 335/336 Spectral Interpretation/Lab 4 credits 

* The department chair may consider other courses for elective approval. *Plus 4 additional elective courses, one of which MUST 13 credits 
have a lab 
REQUIRED COURSES APPLIED FORENSIC SCIENCES 
CRIMINALISTICS/FORENSIC BIOLOGY AND FORENSIC CHEMISTRY ADDITIONAL ELECTIVE COURSES 
CONCENTRATIONS BIO 244/245 Histology & Lab 4 credits 
MAJOR CORE COURSES BIO 310/311 Genetics & Lab 4 credits 
BIO 142/143 Cellular and Molecular Biology/Lab 4 credits BIO 334/335 Human Anatomy/Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 121/122 General Chemistry I/Lab 4 credits BIO 344/345 Human Physiology/Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 131/132 General Chemistry II/Lab 4 credits BIO 430 Molecular Biology 3 credits 
CHEM 240/241 Organic Chemistry I/Lab 4 credits CHEM 310 Advanced Inorganic Chemistry 3 credits 
CHEM 242/243 Organic Chemistry II/Lab 4 credits CHEM Biochemistry II/Lab 4 credits 
PHYS 201/203 General Physics I/Lab 4 credits 338/339 
PHYS 202/206 General Physics II/Lab 4 credits CHEM 341 Physical Chemistry I 3 credits 
MATH 170 Calculus I 4 credits CHEM 351 Physical Chemistry II 3 credits 
MATH 171 Calculus II 4 credits FRSC 250 Forensic Photography 3 credits 
FRSC 150/151 Introduction to the Forensic 4 credits FRSC 320 Indoor Crime Scene Investigation 3 credits 

Sciences/Lab FRSC 360 Forensic Chemistry 3 credits 
FRSC 242/243 Criminalistics I Lab 4 credits FRSC 410 Death Investigation 3 credits 
FRSC 300/301 Environmental Evidence Lab 4 credits FRSC 460 Fire Science and Arson 3 credits 

FRSC 310 Statistics for Forensic Science and 3 credits * The department chair may consider other courses for elective approval. 
Anthropology 
FRSC 340 Physical Evidence and the Law 3 credits 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


ART 
49 ART 


ART 

BACHELOR OF ART 

DEPARTMENT CHAIR 

Jodi Staniunas-Hopper, MFA 

FACULTY 

Professor: 

Daniel Burke, M.Ed. 

Thomas Hubert, MFA 

Associate Professor: 

Jodi Staniunas-Hopper, MFA 

Assistant Professor and Program Director of Studio Art: 

Gary Cardot, M.A., MFA 

Lecturer and Program Director of Graphic Design: 

Peter Stadtmueller, M.S. 

Program Director of Art Therapy: 

Heather J. Denning, M.A., A.T.R., A.T.C.S., L.S.W 

INTRODUCTION 

The university offers the Bachelor of Arts degree with majors in Art 
Education, Art Therapy, Graphic Design, and Studio Art. 

MISSION STATEMENT 

In accord with the University Mission Statement and grounded in the Art 
Department’s history and tradition, we aim to provide training for students 
in selected artistic areas so that they have the opportunity to develop and 
refine their talents and abilities. With this purpose in mind, Art faculty 
members with their varied areas of expertise, encourage and emphasize the 
student’s pursuit of excellence. We believe in a comprehensive approach to 
teaching that values a range of artistic processes and products, as well as a 
variety of historical and contemporary methods to the study of art. We 
believe that art is a universally accepted form of sharing, capable of 
promoting lifelong, caring learners. Dedicated to developing students who 
are globally and socially aware and engaged in service and leadership, we 
provide a wide range of opportunities for students to encounter art. 
Beginning with the Foundation Year, course work emphasizes a hands-on 
studio approach. The learning of artistic processes, methods of creative 
problem solving, the diversity of art materials, media and approaches, the 
importance of design, and the role of art history are mastered and 
integrated to help form future ambassador artists, teachers, therapists, 
designers, and practitioners. 

Our Values -The core values of the university (being socially merciful, 
globally responsible, compassionately hospitable, intellectually creative and 
reflectively aware) are embedded in the Mercyhurst Art Program. 
Artful Discipline -Students of Art will realize true progress in their artistic 
lives when their art becomes part of their daily lives. Students are 
encouraged to use journals and/or sketchbooks to document their work. We 

have found that through this activity, concepts will arise for exploration; 
progress will be documented; research stored; and media and designs can 
be explored, tested, nurtured and developed. 

Creativity -Students within the Art Department are concept, process, and 
product oriented. They learn about creativity and develop ways to 
investigate challenging problems or areas of interest through the use and 
practice of a variety of approaches including mind-mapping, CPS (creative 
problem solving method), brainstorming, matrix systems, analogy, listing 
methods, free expression, etc. 

Design – Using the full spectrum of study from “nature as builder” through 
math as system, art students learn to organize, form, plan and create art 
through the use of the elements, processes and principles of design. 

History of Art – Understanding the past is necessary to future success. Art 
students study, apply, and explore social, cultural, aesthetic, and historical 
perspectives of Western and non-Western art including artists, movements, 
artifacts and styles. 

Social Responsibility -Art students are trained in the powerful tools of 
visual communication and service. With training in design, communication 
theory, and media selection, students are challenged to create responsible 
art, reflect on its impact, and to make ethically sound decisions that benefit 
local and global communities. Students participate in numerous art 
exhibitions, voluntary art projects, and political and social action efforts. 

Professional Practice -Integral to the discipline of art, students are 
trained in the standards and practices of their chosen field. They are called 
upon to uphold the integrity of the profession. 

ART DEPT STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 

The Art curriculum is designed to develop the artist as a whole. Students 
within the Department are concept-, process-and product-oriented. They 
study, apply, and explore social, cultural, aesthetic and historical 
perspectives of art. Students in the Department will: 

• 
Critically analyze select works of art and design. 
• 
Describe the historical, geographic, cultural and contemporary 
contexts of works of art and design. 
• 
Present and critique works of art and design using appropriate criteria 
and terminology. 
• 
Create works of art and design by applying methods, tools, materials 
and techniques. 
• 
Generate and revise ideas in the stages of the creative process. 
• 
Develop works of art and design that utilize concepts, elements and 
principles of art and design. 
DEPARTMENTAL REQUIREMENTS 

A student who wishes to graduate with this major must complete the 
following requirements: 

• 
Satisfactorily complete 48 to 63 credits of Art coursework. 
• 
Maintain a minimum GPA of 2.5 in the major. 
• 
Submit a digital portfolio and an up-to-date resume prior to 
graduation. 
• 
Art Education and Studio Art majors are required to produce a visual 
art thesis in the form of an exhibition during their senior year. 
2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


ART 
50 ART 


Sophomore Review 

Students are reviewed by an evaluation committee in the spring semester of 
the sophomore year. Students must: 

• 
Maintain a minimum GPA in the major (2.5 for Studio Art, Graphic 
Design, and Art Therapy and 3.0 for Art Education). 
• 
Write an artist’s statement. 
• 
Give a presentation of selected works. 
• 
Provide an up-to-date resume. 
After departmental review and under special circumstances, a full-time art 
faculty member’s recommendation may be used in lieu of grades. 

ART EDUCATION 

The Art Education program explores the methods and pedagogical 
competencies that are developed through a range of art and education 
experiences. Through a comprehensive approach, students are nurtured to 
become well-informed, pre-service art teachers who are reflective art 
practitioners and critical thinkers. The Art Education program prepares 
students for PA Department of Education certification. 

In addition to course requirements, students must maintain a 3.0 GPA, 
successfully complete Sophomore Review, and complete a visual thesis in 
the form of an exhibition. Students seeking certification in Art Education are 
required to take at least half of their art courses at Mercyhurst University. 

ART 100 Drawing I 3 credits 
ART 125 2-Dimensional Design 3 credits 
ART 126 3-Dimensional Design 3 credits 
ART 128 Basic Computer Design 3 credits 
ART 101 
OR 
Painting I/ Watercolor 3 credits 
ART 105 Painting I/Acrylic 3 credits 
ART 102 Ceramics I 3 credits 
ART 104 
OR 
Printmaking I 3 credits 
ART 106 Photography I 3 credits 
1 Art Elective 3 credits 
ART 122 
OR 
Ancient to Medieval Art History 3 credits 
ART 123 
ART 223 
Renaissance to 20th Century Art HHistory of Modern Art 
istory 3 credits 
3 credits 
ART 240 Foundations of Art Education 3 credits 
ART 311 Art Education /Secondary 3 credits 
ART 312 Art Education/Elementary 3 credits 
ART 410 Senior Art Thesis Individualized Studio 3 credits 
EDUC 210 
ESPE 101 
ESPE 201 
Comparative Issues in Education 
Psychology of Diverse Learners 
Inclusive Practices PreK-8 
3 credits 
3 credits 
3 credits 
OR 
ESPE 202 Inclusive Practices 7-12 3 credits 
ESPE 301 
WL 101 
EDUC 474 
EDUC 475 
Supporting Literacy PreK-8 
Culturally and Linguistically Diverse Learners 
Clinical Secondary Education (K-12) 
Capstone Clinical Secondary (K-12) Upper Level 
Concentration 
3 credits 
3 credits 
3 credits 
12 credits 

GRAPHIC DESIGN 

The Graphic Design program trains students to utilize their creative, 
cognitive, and psychomotor skills toward the resolution of visual problems. 
The program focuses on publishing—whether it is traditional print design 
or interactive media. The successful Graphic Design student will achieve 
facility in a number of Adobe Creative Suite applications, design and 
communication theory, artful discipline, creative problem solving, social 
responsibility, global awareness, and professional practices. 

ART 100 Drawing I 3 credits 
ART 106 Photography I 3 credits 
ART 125 2-Dimensional Design 3 credits 
ART 126 3-Dimensional Design 3 credits 
ART 128 Basic Computer Design 3 credits 
ART 122 Ancient to Medieval Art History 3 credits 
OR 
ART 123 Renaissance to 20th Century Art History 3 credits 
ART 220 Typographic Foundations 3 credits 
ART 221 Digital Imagery 3 credits 
ART 225 Computer Illustration 3 credits 
ART 230 Graphic Design History 3 credits 
ART 320 Type and Publication Design 3 credits 
ART 321 Introduction to Website Design 3 credits 
ART 322 Corporate Identity and Branding 3 credits 
ART 323 Portfolio Development 3 credits 
ART 325 Intermediate Website Design 3 credits 

2 Approved studio offerings. 

ART THERAPY 

Art Therapy majors investigate the healing potential of the arts through 
self-reflective art directives, research, and service learning in the 
community. The program includes classes in: art therapy, studio art, and 
psychology. In art therapy classes, students develop a non-judgmental 
approach toward art made by themselves and others. This approach enables 
an ability to support the use of art as a way to address goals and problems. 
Internships provide students with opportunities to witness and encourage 
art-making as a transformational process. 

“The creative process involved in the making of art is healing and life 
enhancing.” — American Art Therapy Association, mission statement 

ART 100 Drawing I 3 credits 
ART 125 2-Dimensional Design 3 credits 
ART 126 3-Dimensional Design 3 credits 
ART 128 Basic Computer Design 3 credits 
ARTH 125 Art Therapy/Introduction I 3 credits 
ARTH 225 Art Therapy II/Materials and Methods 3 credits 
ARTH 325 Art Therapy III/Practices 3 credits 
ARTH 425 Art Therapy V Seminar 3 credits 
ARTH 475 Art Therapy IV Internship 3 credits 
ART 101 Painting I /Watercolor 3 credits 
OR 
ART 105 Painting I/Acrylic 3 credits 
ART 102 Ceramics I 3 credits 
ART 122 Ancient to Medieval Art 3 credits 
OR 
ART 123 Renaissance to 20th Century 3 credits 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


ART 51 ART 


PSYC 101 Introduction to Psychology 3 credits 
PSYC 241 Developmental Psychology 3 credits ART HISTORY MINOR 
OR ART 122 Ancient to Medieval Art History 3 credits 
PSYC 242 Developmental Psychology: Adolescence 3 credits ART 123 Renaissance to 20th Century Art History 3 credits 
PSYC 201 Personality 3 credits ART 128 Basic Computer Design 3 credits 
OR ART 223 History of Modern Art 3 credits 
SOC 108 Human Growth & Development 3 credits ART 224 History of Photography 3 credits 
PSYC 211 Abnormal Psychology 3 credits ART 230 Graphic Design History 3 credits 
OR ID 220 History of Interior Design 3 credits 
SPED 104 Psychology of Exceptional Children 3 credits OR 
SOC 100 Introduction to Sociology 3 credits ID 221 History of Architecture 3 credits 
OR 
PSYC 231 Social Psychology 3 credits ART THERAPY MINOR 
1 Approved Art Studio Course ART 100 Drawing I 3 credits 
ART 102 Ceramics I 3 credits 
STUDIO ART ART 128 Basic Computer Design 3 credits 
The Studio Art program emphasizes hands-on learning, stresses ARTH 125 Art Therapy /Introduction I 3 credits 
craftsmanship and design, and strives for excellence in the production of art. ARTH 225 Art Therapy II/Materials and Methods 3 credits 
Students come with gifts, talent, focus, passion and imagination. They, in ARTH 325 Art Therapy III/Practices 3 credits 
turn, are provided the environment and guidance that are needed to PSYC 101 Introduction to Psychology 3 credits 
develop a disciplined approach to the making of art. The concentration is 
primarily designed as a preparation for graduate school and further PHOTOGRAPHY MINOR 
professional study, but, given the variety of studio experiences, students ART 106 Photography I 3 credits 
also pursue careers in design, publication, commercial galleries and ART 128 Basic Computer Design 3 credits 
museum work. ART 206 Intermediate Photography 3 credits 
ART 306 Color Photography 3 credits 
In addition to course requirements, students must successfully complete ART 223 History of Modern Art 3 credits 
Sophomore Review and complete a visual thesis in the form of an exhibition. ART 224 History of Photography 3 credits 
ART 305 Digital Photography 3 credits 
ART 100 Drawing I 3 credits 
ART 101 Painting I /Watercolor 3 credits GRAPHIC DESIGN MINOR 
OR ART 128 Basic Computer Design 3 credits 
ART 105 Painting I/Acrylic 3 credits ART 220 Typographic Foundations 3 credits 
ART 102 Ceramics I 3 credits ART 221 Digital Imagery 3 credits 
ART 103 Sculpture 3 credits 4 Approved Art/Graphic Design Electives 
OR 
ART 216 Ceramic Sculpture 3 credits 
ART 125 2-Dimensional Design 3 credits 
ART 126 3-Dimensional Design 3 credits 
ART 128 Basic Computer Design 3 credits 
ART 106 Photography I 3 credits 
ART 122 Ancient to Medieval Art History 3 credits 
ART 123 Renaissance to 20th Century Art History 3 credits 
ART 223 History of Modern Art 3 credits 
ART 410 Senior Art Thesis Individualized Studio 3 credits 
[3] Studio Electives 
[3] Upper Level Concentration 
ART MINOR 
ART 100 Drawing I 3 credits 
ART 122 Ancient to Medieval Art History 3 credits 
OR 
ART 123 Renaissance to 20th Century Art History 3 credits 
ART 125 2-Dimensional Design 3 credits 
ART 126 3-Dimensional Design 3 credits 
ART 128 Basic Computer Design 3 credits 
2 Approved Art Electives 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Athletic Training 52 Athletic Training 

Athletic Training 

BACHELOR OF SCIENCE 

PROGRAM DIRECTOR: 

Scott Michel Ph.D., L.A.T., A.T.C. 

Clinical Coordinator 

Suzanne M. Gushie, M.A., L.A.T., A.T.C. 

FACULTY 

Assistant Professors: 

Suzanne M. Gushie, M.A., L.A.T., A.T.C. 
Scott Michel Ph.D., L.A.T., A.T.C. 
Timothy Harvey, M.S. 
Bradley R. Jacobson, M.A., L.A.T., A.T.C. 


Adjunct: 

Chris Rial, D.O. 

Medical Education Coordinator 

Allison Brooks, M.A., L.A.T., A.T.C. 

ACCREDITATION 

The athletic training program at Mercyhurst University is accredited by the 
Commission of Accreditation of Athletic Training (CaATE) through 20192020. 
Further information regarding CaATE requirements is located at 

http://www.caate.net. 

MISSION STATEMENT 

The mission of the professional Athletic Training program at Mercyhurst 
University is to provide the student with the necessary didactic and 
psychomotor competencies, clinical proficiencies and experiences required 
to qualify for the BOC examination. In the spirit of the core values of 
Mercyhurst University, athletic training students shall achieve this by 
becoming well-rounded, educated, professional and ethical athletic trainers 
prepared to enter the allied health field. 

PROGRAM STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 

Administration and Professionalism: Athletic training students demonstrate 
dispositions essential to becoming effective professionals and utilize plans, 
policies, and procedures to ensure responsive and effective operations. 

Critical Thinking and Analytical Skills: Athletic training students utilize 
critical thinking, and analytical skills to enhance clinical decision making. 
Scientific and Technical Knowledge & Comprehension: Athletic training 
students know and apply the requisite discipline-specific scientific and 
technical concepts critical to their development. 

Written and Oral Communication Skills: Athletic training students use 
effective communication skills to enhance health care delivery 

ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS 

Freshmen students must have a minimum GPA of 3.0 in high school plus 
successful completion of each of the following six subjects: Algebra, 
Geometry, Trigonometry, Biology, Chemistry and Physics, or General 
Science. Prior to entering their freshman year, it is recommended that 
athletic training majors complete the American Red Cross or American Heart 
Association CPR for health professional certification, proof of which is a 
signed certification card. 

TRANSFER / UNDECLARED STUDENTS 

Students transferring into the Athletic Training major must have completed 
or will complete the specified courses for the review board process within 
one academic year after transferring into the athletic training major. 
Transfer students must also appear before the AT review board during their 
first year and be officially accepted into the major prior to enrolling in upper 
level courses offered by the Sports Medicine department. All athletic 
training transfer students must complete the required educational 
competencies developed by the NATA Education Council offered by 
Mercyhurst that comprise the Athletic Training program or documented 
proof from the accredited transferring institution. 

FINAL ACCEPTANCE REQUIREMENTS 

Traditional students in the Athletic Training major should apply for formal 
acceptance into the major in spring of the freshman year while those in the 
other areas of Sports Medicine must apply in spring of the sophomore year. 
Failure to do so results in an automatic change of status to undeclared 
student. 

ACADEMIC 

Athletic Training majors must achieve and maintain an overall GPA of 2.65 
or higher. In order to complete the AT major with either a dual 
major or minor within four years, students will be required to overload 
semesters and/or take summer courses. 

REVIEW BOARD 

The Review Board consists of three members from the discipline 
appropriately related to the major. Deliberations of the Board will take at 
the end of the spring semester of the student’s freshman year and at other 
times when the department chair deems necessary. 

EVALUATION PROCESS 

The prospective athletic training student will have the opportunity to obtain 
a maximum of 300 points for the review board process. The 300 points 
consist of the interview process, application, and for the letters of 
recommendation. The candidate must obtain a minimum of 240 points and 
have an overall GPA of 2.65 and specific course work for acceptance into the 
athletic training education program. Probationary status may be awarded if 
a score of 240 points or better is achieved, and the candidate’s overall GPA is 
between 2.55 and 2.65. If the student meets probationary criteria, he or she 
may be conditionally accepted into the major. The probationary student 
must achieve a minimum overall 2.65 GPA within the time designated by 
the program director or he/she will be dismissed from the program. While 
on probationary status the athletic training student will complete all clinical 
and academic requirements of the program. It is necessary that all accepted 
athletic training students have a completed health physical, proof of up to 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Athletic Training 53 Athletic Training 

date immunizations, TB test, and required state/federal clearances. The 
physical and TB test will be provided by the university at no charge to the 
student. Also, accepted students must become members of the NATA ($80 
approximate cost per year) and possess a current American Red Cross 
Professional Rescuer certification ($15 approximate cost per year). If at any 
time if a student falls below a 2.65 GPA, the student will be placed on 
probation. A GPA of 2.65 must be achieved within the time designated by 
the program director or the student will be dismissed. 

Freshmen and transfer students entering the Athletic Training major are 
encouraged to successfully complete the American Red Cross Professional 
Rescuer class prior to starting classes. Accepted proof will be a signed course 
roster or certification card from the American Red Cross. 

NOTE: It is made clear that a student who is advised to discontinue the 
Athletic Training major will find that a lateral move to a related science 
major is very difficult without having to take more than 121 credits due to 
the stringent science requirements in related fields. This is a risk that the 
student knowingly assumes when he or she accepts initial acceptance into 
the athletic training major. 

APPEAL PROCESS 

Any student dismissed from the Athletic Training major may apply for 
readmittance 
to the program during the next session of the Review Board. 
The eligibility of the individual will be determined by the review board using 
the same criteria as is used for accepting a new student into the program. 
Anyone using the appeal process should contact the program director one 
semester prior to the review board session to initiate the process. 

GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS 

Students who have been accepted into the Athletic Training major by the 
Review Board members must maintain an overall GPA of at least a 2.65 to 
continue in the major. This is to ensure necessary mastery of NATA Education 
competencies and proficiencies. All athletic training students must complete 
6 clinical experiences including one capstone experience. This includes all 
related course requirements. Seniors must pass a comprehensive multiple-
choice exam required in ATR 404 with a minimum of 70 percent. Annual 
Blood Borne Pathogen training is required, along with Professional Rescuer 
CPR. No major course may be taken on a pass-fail basis and students who 
earn less than a “C” in any major course or lab must repeat the course or lab. 
Note: some of the requirements for the major also satisfy specific core 
requirements. Students who are not majors (including contract majors) may 
not take or challenge courses offered by the Sports Medicine 
Department/Athletic Training faculty without written permission from the 
department chairperson. 

ATHLETIC TRAINING CLINCAL ASSIGNMENTS 

As a component of SPMD 157, ATR 162 and ATR 163, freshman students 
must complete a minimum of 75 hours of observation in the athletic 
training room at Mercyhurst University. These hours are observation only 
and occur under the supervision of an affiliated clinical preceptor. 
Once accepted into the major following the review board process, students 
must complete 6 clinical assignments including one senior capstone 
experience under the direct supervision of an affiliated clinical preceptor. 

Clinical assignments are designed to allow students to progressively apply 
didactic knowledge in real-world clinical settings in an effort to develop a 
high level of clinical skill. Clinical assignments are a requirement of various 
courses (ATR 200, ATR 201, ATR 264, ATR 300, ATR 301, ATR 404, and ATR 
461) and will encompass general medical, lower extremity, upper extremity 
and equipment intensive experiences. Clinical assignments will expose the 
students to the physically active population of both genders, and across 
diverse populations including high schools, colleges and universities, 
medical facilities and professional sports organizations. A minimum of 2 
clinical assignments must be at designated off-campus affiliated settings. It 
is required that students have some form of transportation for at least two 
semesters to complete these off-campus clinical assignments. In addition, 
clinical assignments associated with ATR 200, ATR 300 and ATR 461 will 
begin prior to the start of the academic year typically on or around Aug. 15. 
(Housing and 2 meals per day are provided for students during this time.) 

Clinical experiences are NOT work experiences; they are academic 
requirements. Therefore, students are not monetarily compensated. 

REQUIRED COURSES 

In addition to the core required of all majors, the following courses are 
required of those individuals in the Athletic Training major. A higher-level 
science course can be substituted if approved by the athletic training 
program director. 

SOC 108 Human Growth and Development 3 credits 
PHYS 100 Conceptual Physics 3 credits 
PSYC 101 Introduction to Psychology 3 credits 
MATH 139 Statistics for Sciences 3 credits 
CHEM 101/102 Chemical Principles & Lab 4 credits 
ATR 256 Exercise, Health & Conditioning for Athletes 2 credits 
ATR 162/163 Introduction to Athletic Training & Lab 4 credits 
ATR 257 Medical Education Lab I 1 credit 
ATR 258 Medical Education Lab II 1 credit 
ATR 267/268 Therapeutic Modalities & Lab 4 credits 
ATR 362/363 Therapeutic Exercise & Lab 4 credits 
ATR 404 Athletic Training Capstone Experience 3 credits 
ATR 461 Special Issues in Athletic Training 3 credits 
ATR 200 Clinical Education I Lab 1 credit 
ATR 201 Clinical Education II Lab 1 credit 
ATR 300 Clinical Education III Lab 1 credit 
ATR 301 Clinical Education IV Lab 1 credit 
ATR 364 Athletic Training Administration and 3 credits 
Management 
SPMD 157 Emergency Athletic Injury Management (EAIM) 3 credits 
SPMD 161 Assessment Injury Management I 3 credits 
SPMD 262 Assessment Injury Management II 3 credits 
SPMD 263 Nutrition for Health Professionals 3 credits 
SPMD 264 Assessment Injury Management III 3 credits 
SPMD 365/366 Kinesiology & Lab 4 credits 
ATR 480 Research Methods I 3 credits 
BIO 240/241 Human Anatomy and Physiology I & Lab 4 credits 
BIO 250/251 Human Anatomy & Physiology II & Lab 3 credits 
SPMD 380/381 Exercise Physiology & Lab 4 credits 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Athletic Training 54 Athletic Training 

** Students may upgrade science courses/lab with permission of the AT 
Program Director. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Biology 55 Biology 

Biology 

DEPARTMENT CHAIR: 

J. Michael Campbell, Ph.D. 
FACULTY 

Professors: 
J. Michael Campbell, Ph.D. 
David C. Hyland, Ph.D. 


Associate Professors: 

Michael A. Elnitsky, Ph.D. 
Larry P. Gauriloff, Ph.D. 


Assistant Professors: 

Christopher R. Dolanc, Ph.D. 
Michael S. Foulk, Ph.D. 
Sara Turner, Ph.D. 


Lecturers: 

Sarah L. Bennett, M.S. 

Instructors: 

Amy Burniston, M.S. 
Summer Ekelund-Weaver, M.A. 
Katie Kilmer, M.S. 


Adjunct Professor, Laboratory Director and Research 
Associate: 


Darlene Melchitzky, M.S. 

Medical Technology Concentration: 

Stephen M. Johnson, M.S., M.T. (ASCP) Program Director School of 
Medical Technology, Saint Vincent Health Center 


Jeffrey Richmond, M.D. Medical Director School of Medical 
Technology, Saint Vincent Health Center 


INTRODUCTION 

Biology is the scientific study of life in all its astonishing forms from its 
origins some 4 billion years ago to the present day. This experimental 
science involves an examination of life on multiple scales from the 
molecular to the global. Though difficult to define, the study of life rests 
upon two fundamental notions. The first is that living systems operate via 
basic thermodynamic and kinetic principles. The second is the unifying 
concept of evolution, the most original and important idea of the modern 
era. Given these principles and great time life has generated immense and 
complex diversity. Biologists strive to understand and manage this diversity 

by examining the genetic history and special features of each species as well 
as the interactions between each species and its environment. 

On a more applied level, biologists are concerned with the impact humans 
have had and continue to have upon the environment and how, in turn, the 
environment affects our own quality of life. Additionally, new discoveries in 
biology often have social, political, economic, and ethical implications. 
Biology provides both the knowledge and the tools required to understand 
these complex problems and challenges. 

Beyond the basic but substantive curriculum, several specialized programs 
are available through the Department of Biology. The Department’s newest 
specialized programs include Bioinformatics and Environmental Science 
with a concentration in Biology Field Studies. The environmental program is 
coordinated with a similar program in the Geology Department and 
students benefit from specialized training both subjects. 

In support of the Environmental Science program, the Biology Department 
manages two major natural areas owned by the university within the 
Pennsylvania Lake Erie watershed: the Jean B. and J. Douglas James 
Ecological & Wildlife Preserve and the Mary Jo and Ed Maier Field Station. 
For a listing of required environmental science courses, please consult the 
Environmental Science section in the undergraduate catalog 

The new Bioinformatics program is offered in cooperation with the 
Mathematics and Information Technology Department and advances the 
use of modern computer software and specialized DNA sequencing tools to 
address questions relevant to biology and medicine. Development of this 
program was made possible by the establishment of the Orris C. Hirtzel and 
Beatrice Dewey Hirtzel DNA Sequencing Center housed within the Biology 
Department. 

The Department is a full member and active participant in the Regional 
Science Consortium, a collaborative, nonprofit organization which focuses 
on and coordinates educational and research projects for Lake Erie and the 
upper Ohio River Basin, offering college courses and research opportunities 
to students from more than a dozen regional colleges and universities at the 
Tom Ridge Environmental Center. Consortium facilities available to 
Mercyhurst biology students include well-equipped research and teaching 
laboratories, classrooms, greenhouse, natural history collections, sampling 
equipment and research vessels. 

Mercyhurst is a member of Beta Beta Beta, a national honor and 
professional society for students dedicated to improving the understanding 
and appreciation of biological study and extending boundaries of human 
knowledge through scientific research. 

Mercyhurst students who aspire to teach biology at the secondary level can 
earn a Bachelor of Science or Bachelor of Arts degree in Biology, a Master of 
Science degree in Secondary Education, and become certified to teach 
grades 7 through 12, in a total of five years. 

In the health professions, the Department offers a variety of programs. Each 
includes preparatory course work necessary to apply to Pharmacy, Medical, 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Biology 
56 Biology 

Veterinary, Physician Assistant, and Dental schools, among others. To 
increase opportunities for students interested in the health professions, the 
university has cooperative agreements with a number of professional 
schools. 

MISSION STATEMENT 

The primary goal of the Department of Biology is to provide thorough and 
basic training in the broad field of biology through a forward-looking and 
comprehensive curriculum that emphasizes critical thinking and the 
development of a scientific perspective. This includes instruction by 
dedicated faculty in each of the principal areas within biology and 
supporting coursework in mathematics, physics, and chemistry. Central to 
the program is the Department’s commitment to experiential learning 
through rigorous laboratory exercises, hands-on field experiences, and the 
opportunity to participate in faculty-student collaborative research, travel 
courses, professional conferences, community service, and professional 
practicum training. Personal attention and close interaction between 
faculty and student provides the biology major with a solid core of learning, 
experience, and preparation, and the means to secure fulfilling employment 
or continue their education at the graduate and professional level. 

PROGRAM STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 

The Biology Department has identified four learning outcomes that all 
biology majors should meet before they earn their degree. Upon completion 
of the Biology curriculum all students should be able to: 

• 
Demonstrate knowledge in three major areas of biology: cellular 
and molecular biology (including genetics), ecology and 
evolution, and organismal biology. 
• 
Critically analyze scientific information. 
• 
Design and conduct scientific research in a professional manner. 
• 
Communicate scientific findings in a professional manner. 
ADVISING 

A great college education depends upon human relationships and good 
advising is central to creating a positive educational environment for the 
student. Upon enrollment in the department an advisor is assigned to the 
student. Special faculty advisors are available for students in specific career 
alternatives including medicine and other health professions, secondary 
education and any of the concentrations offered by the department. In 
addition, for pre-health students, the university has an Office of Pre-Health 
Professions. These advisors assist the student with course selection, keep 
student records, monitor student achievements, and guide students through 
the application process to graduate and professional schools. 

BIOLOGY REQUIREMENTS 

The Department of Biology offers courses leading to the Bachelor of Arts 
(B.A.) or Bachelor of Science (B.S.) degree in Biology. Students enrolled in 
one of the concentrations offered within the department are required to 
pursue the Bachelor of Science (B.S.) degree in Biology. Those who expect to 
attend graduate or professional schools after graduation are strongly 
encouraged to also pursue the Bachelor of Science (B.S.) degree in Biology. 

Biology majors must maintain a 2.50 GPA in the major program as well as an 
overall GPA of 2.50. Biology majors in the 4+1 accelerated program leading 

to the M.S. in Secondary Education must maintain a 3.00 GPA in the major 
program and overall. Students accepted to the 2+3 and 3+3 accelerated 
programs in Pharmacy must maintain an overall and science GPA of 3.40 
with no grade lower than a “C”. Those enrolled in the 3+4 accelerated 
programs in Medicine must maintain an overall GPA of 3.40 and a science 
GPA of 3.20 with no grade lower than a “C.” Students earning a grade lower 
than “C” in a major or cognate course must repeat the class and earn a grade 
level of Pass. Students will be evaluated during the Spring Semester of their 
sophomore year. 

BIOLOGY MAJOR CORE COURSES 

BIO 142 Cellular and Molecular Biology 3 credits 
BIO 143 Cell and Molecular Biology Lab 1 credit 
BIO 146 Ecology and Evolutionary Biology of 3 credits 
Organisms 
BIO 147 Ecology and Evolutionary Biology of 1 credit 
Organisms Lab 
BIO 310 Genetics 3 credits 
BIO 311 Genetics Lab 1 credit 
BIO 370 Cellular Biochemistry 3 credits 
BIO 371 Cellular Biochemistry Lab 1 credit 
OR 
CHEM 331 Biochemistry I 3 credits 
CHEM 332 Biochemistry I Lab 1 credit 
CHEM 338 Biochemistry II 3 credits 
CHEM 339 Biochemistry II Lab 1 credit 

THEMATIC COURSES 

ANATOMY 
Choose one of the following: 
BIO 244 Histology 3 credits 
BIO 245 Histology Lab 1 credit 
BIO 320 Comparative Vertebrate 

Anatomy 3 credits 
BIO 321 Comparative Vertebrate 

Anatomy Lab 1 credit 
BIO 322 Plant Anatomy 3 credits 
BIO 323 Plant Anatomy Lab 1 credit 
BIO 334 Human Anatomy 3 credits 
BIO 335 Human Anatomy Lab 1 credit 

PHYSIOLOGY 
Choose one of the following: 
BIO 290 Environmental 

Physiology 3 credits 
BIO 360 Systems Physiology 3 credits 
BIO 361 Systems Physiology 

Lab 1 credit 
BIO 344 Human Physiology 3 credits 
BIO 345 Human Physiology Lab 1 credit 

ORGANISMAL BIOLOGY 
Choose one of the following: 
BIO 200 Microbiology 3 credits 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Biology 57 Biology 

BIO 201 Microbiology Lab 
BIO 210 Botany 
BIO 211 Botany Lab 
BIO 294 Parasitology 
BIO 354 The Biology of Insect 
BIO 355 The Biology of Insects Lab 
BIO 422 Mycology 
BIO 423 Mycology Lab 

ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY 
Choose one of the following 
BIO 292 Field Ecology 
BIO 293 Field Ecology Lab 
BIO 392 Field Botany 
BIO 410 Microbial Ecology 
BIO 411 Microbial Ecology Lab 
BIO 424 Restoration Ecology 
BIO 426 Limnology 
BIO 427 Limnology Lab 

ELECTIVE COURSES 

At least 2 additional biology courses numbered 200 or h

RESEARCH COURSES 

BIO 466 Senior Thesis 
OR 
BIO 474 Biology Practicum 

B.A. COGNATE COURSES 
CHEM 240 Organic Chemistry I 
CHEM 241 Organic Chemistry I Lab 
CHEM 121 General Chemistry I 
CHEM 122 General Chemistry I Lab 
CHEM 131 General Chemistry II 
CHEM 132 General Chemistry II Lab 
PHYS 101 Principles of Physics I 
PHYS 103 Principles of Physics I Lab 
Any two (2) math courses numbered 109 or higher. 

B.S. COGNATE COURSES 
MATH 170 Calculus I 
CHEM 121 General Chemistry I 
CHEM 122 General Chemistry I Lab 
CHEM 131 General Chemistry II 
CHEM 132 General Chemistry II Lab 
CHEM 240 Organic Chemistry I 
CHEM 241 Organic Chemistry I Lab 
CHEM 242 Organic Chemistry II 
CHEM 243 Organic Chemistry II Lab 
PHYS 101 Principles of Physics I 
PHYS 103 Principles of Physics I Lab 
OR 
PHYS 201 General Physics I 
PHYS 203 General Physics I Lab 

1 credit 
3 credits 
1 credit 
3 credits 
3 credits 
1 credit 
3 credits 
1 credit 

3 credits 
1 credit 
3 credits 
3 credits 
1 credit 
3 credits 
3 credits 
1 credit 

igher. 6 credits 

1-3 credits 

1-3 credits 

3 credits 
1 credit 
3 credits 
1 credit 
3 credits 
1 credit 
3 credits 
1 credit 

4 credits 
3 credits 
1 credit 
3 credits 
1 credit 
3 credits 
1 credit 
3 credits 
1 credit 
3 credits 
1 credit 

3 credits 
1 credit 

PHYS 102 Principles of Physics II 3 credits 
PHYS 106 Principles of Physics II Lab 1 credt 
OR 
PHYS 202 General Physics II 3 credits 
PHYS 206 General Physics II Lab 1 credit 
A second math course subject to department chair approval. 

NEUROSCIENCE CONCENTRATION 

The Neuroscience Concentration is an interdisciplinary concentration 
administered by the Biology and Psychology Departments 

BIO-PSYC CORE COURSES 

BIO 142/143 Cellular and Molecular Biology & Lab 4 credits 
BIO 146 /147 Ecology and Evolutionary Biology of 4 credits 

Organisms & Lab 
BIO 450 Neurobiology 3 credits 
PSYC 101 Introduction to Psychology 3 credits 
PSYC 252 Biopsychology 3 credits 
BIO 466 Senior Thesis 3 credits 
OR 
BIO 474 Biology Practicum 3 credits 

Choose five (5) of the following: 
BIO 310/311 Genetics & Lab 4 credits 
BIO 320/321 Comparative Vertebrate Anatomy & 4 credits 

Lab 
BIO 330 Immunology 3 credits 
BIO 334/335 Human Anatomy & Lab 4 credits 
BIO 344/345 Human Physiology & Lab 4 credits 
BIO 370/371 Cellular Biochemistry & Lab 4 credits 
BIO 430 Molecular Biology 3 credits 
PSYC 211 Abnormal Psychology 3 credits 
PSYC 237 Memory and Cognition 3 credits 
PSYC 253 Drugs and Human Behavior 3 credits 

MEDICAL TECHNOLOGY CONCENTRATION 

To become a registered Medical Technologist, a student must complete at 
least three years of college (the equivalent of 90 semester hours), a year of 
training at an AMA approved school of Medical Technology, and pass a 
registry examination. During the fall of the junior year, the student applies to 
one or more approved schools of Medical Technology. Mercyhurst University 
is affiliated with Saint Vincent Health Center, Erie, Pa., and WCA Hospital in 
Jamestown, N.Y. Other affiliations may be arranged on an individual basis. 
Upon satisfactory completion of the courses at the affiliated school, the 
student earns a B.S. in Biology/Medical Technology from Mercyhurst and is 
eligible to sit for the registry examination. Besides the university's standard 
core requirements, students in the medical technology concentration are 
expected to take the following courses: 

MAJOR COURSES 

BIO 142/143 Cellular and Molecular Biology & Lab 4 credits 
BIO 146/147 Ecology and Evolutionary Biology of 4 credits 

Organisms & Lab 
BIO 200/201 Microbiology & Lab 4 credits 
BIO 310/311 Genetics & Lab 4 credits 
BIO 330 Immunology 3 credits 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Business 58 Business 

COGNATE COURSES 
Two math courses 6-8 credits 
CHEM 121/122 General Chemistry I & Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 131/132 General Chemistry II & Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 240/241 Organic Chemistry I & Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 242/243 Organic Chemistry II & Lab 4 credits 
PHYS 101/103 Principles of Physics I & Lab 4 credits 
PHYS 102/106 Principles of Physics II & Lab 4 credits 
STRONGLY RECOMMENDED COURSES 
MIS 101 Computer Applications 3 credits 
BIO 240 /241 Human Anatomy and Physiology I & Lab 4 credits 
BIO 250 /251 Human Anatomy and Physiology II & Lab 4 credits 
BIO 370/371 Cellular Biochemistry & Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 331/332 Biochemistry I & Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 333/334 Instrumental Analysis & Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 338/339 Biochemistry II & Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 341 Physical Chemistry I 3 credits 
AFFILIATE COURSES 

Dependent upon the specific program, other required courses may include: 
Bacteriology, Clinical Chemistry, Education in Medical Technology, 
Immunohematology, Serology, Hematology, and Coagulation Management 
and Supervision, Mycology, Parasitology 

AFFILIATED PROGRAMS IN MEDICINE 

Mercyhurst University and the Lake Erie College of Osteopathic Medicine 
(LECOM) School of Medicine, Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine, 
and Kent State University College of Podiatric Medicine maintain affiliation 
agreements that pledge our commitment to the training of future medical 
practitioners. Our affiliated programs give students the opportunity to 
complete their medical education in two phases. Phase I consists of three or 
four years of undergraduate and pre-medical education at Mercyhurst, and 
Phase II consists of four years of medical education at LECOM, PCOM or Kent 
State. 

2+3 AND 3+3 ACCELERATED PROGRAM IN PHARMACY 

Mercyhurst University and the Lake Erie College of Osteopathic Medicine 
(LECOM) School of Pharmacy maintain an affiliation agreement that pledges 
our commitment to the training of future pharmacy practitioners. Our 
affiliated program gives students the opportunity to complete their 
pharmacy education in two phases. Phase I consists of two or three years of 
undergraduate and pre-pharmacy education at Mercyhurst, and Phase II 
consists of three years of pharmacy education at LECOM School of Pharmacy. 

4+4 PROGRAM IN DENTISTRY 

Mercyhurst University and the Lake Erie College of Osteopathic Medicine 
(LECOM) School of Dentistry have formed an affiliation agreement that 
pledges our commitment to the training of future dentists by giving 
students the opportunity for acceptance in a program coming out of high 
school to complete their dental education in two phases. Phase I consists of 
four years of undergraduate education at Mercyhurst University, and Phase 
II consists of four years of dental education at LECOM School of Dentistry. 

3+3 ACCELERATED PROGRAM IN CHIROPRACTIC MEDICINE 

Mercyhurst University and the New York Chiropractic College (NYCC) have 
entered into an affiliation agreement that allows students to matriculate 
into the Doctor of Chiropractic Medicine Program at NYCC following their 
third year of study at Mercyhurst University. Upon successful completion of 
the student’s first year at NYCC, a Bachelor of Arts degree in Biology will be 
awarded to the student from Mercyhurst University. 

4+1 ACCELERATED PROGRAM IN BIOLOGY AND SECONDARY 
EDUCATION 

The Departments of Biology and Education together offer an accelerated 
program leading to the B.A. or B.S. in Biology and the M.S. in Secondary 
Education. During the first four years of the program, students complete all 
of the requirements for the Biology degree. The fifth year of the program— 
administered by the Department of Education—begins each July and 
continues for a full year. Upon successful completion of the fifth year the 

M.S. in Secondary Education: Pedagogy and Practice is awarded. 
UNDERGRADUATE AND GRADUATE EDUCATION COURSES 

BIO 142/143 Cellular and Molecular Biology & Lab 4 credits 
BIO 146/147 Ecology and Evolutionary Biology of 4 credits 

Organisms & Lab 
BIO 210/211 Botany & Lab 4 credits 
BIO 292/293 Field Ecology & Lab 4 credits 
OR 
BIO 426/427 Limnology & Lab 4 credits 
BIO 310/311 Genetics & Lab 4 credits 
BIO 320/321 Comparative Vertebrate Anatomy & Lab 4 credits 
OR 
BIO 334/335 Human Anatomy & Lab 4 credits 
BIO 344/345 Human Physiology & Lab 4 credits 
OR 
BIO 360/361 Systems Physiology & Lab 4 credits 
BIO 370/371 Cellular Biochemistry & Lab 4 credits 
OR 
BIO 430 Molecular Biology 3 credits 
Two upper-level Biology elective courses. Cognate courses 6-8 credits 
in Math, Chemistry and Physics. 

UNDERGRADUATE AND GRADUATE EDUCATION COURSES 

For a listing of required education courses, please consult the Education 
Department sections in the Undergraduate and Graduate Catalogs. 

BIOLOGY MINOR 

BIO 142 Cellular and Molecular Biology 3 credits 
BIO 143 Cell and Molecular Biology Lab 1 credit 
BIO 146 Ecology and Evolutionary Biology of 3 credits 

Organisms 
BIO 147 Ecology and Evolutionary Biology of 1 credit 

Organisms Lab 
Four (4) additional Biology courses numbered 200 or higher . 12-16 cr 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Business 59 Business 

Business 

DEPARTMENT CHAIR 

Juan Argaez, Ph.D 

FACULTY 

Associate Professors: 

Mary B. Breckenridge, Ed.D., Dean of Walker College of Business 
Amy Doolan, D.B.A., Associate Dean; Juan Argaez, Ph.D. 
Penny Hanes, MBA, CPA, Department Chair 


Assistant Professors: 

Lee Anna Belovarac, MBA; Robert Cullen, MBA, CFP 
Adrienne Foos, Ph.D.; Kristofer Gossett, DBA; John Parente, D.Ed. 
Selin Yalcindag, Ph.D. 
Kim Zacherl, MBA, SPHR, SHRM-SCP 


Instructors: 

William Jeffress, MBA 
Mark Simpson, MBA, M.S., CFP, CPA 


INTRODUCTION 

The curriculum of the Business Department within the Walker College of 
Business is designed to prepare students for management positions in 
business and industry, with federal, state and municipal agencies 
performing business functions, to become entrepreneurs, and to prepare 
students for graduate and professional schools. Mercyhurst University, 
through its business department, has the following degree programs 
accredited by the International Assembly for Collegiate Business Education: 

• 
Bachelor of Arts degree in Accounting 
• 
Bachelor of Arts degree in Business Economics 
• 
Bachelor of Arts degree in Human Resource Management 
• 
Bachelor of Arts degree in Marketing 
• 
Bachelor of Arts degree in Finance 
• 
Bachelor of Arts degree in International Business 
• 
Bachelor of Arts degree in Management 
• 
Bachelor of Arts degree in Sport Business Management 
Curriculum in the business majors is designed to develop the “whole person” 
through a basic liberal-arts course of study; develop communication skills, 
both oral and written; offer a broad base of business courses for general 
understanding of the world of business with specialized study in a 
functional area of business; provide analytic and decision-making tools; and 
provide students with off-campus work experience (internship), where 
theory from coursework is put into practice. 

MISSION STATEMENT 

The mission of the Business Department is to prepare students for leadership 
roles on the national and international level, to become the entrepreneurs 
of the future, and to continue their education in graduate and professional 
schools. With its collegial and supportive culture, the department embraces 
a rigorous and collaborative approach to learning that inspires informed 
judgment, decisive action and a global, enterprise perspective. Graduates 
will embrace Mercyhurst’s core values of respect and tolerance for people 
and their ideas, and dignity in the treatment of all workers. 

PROGRAM STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 

Business graduates are expected to demonstrate: competency in both oral 
and written communication, the ability to work effectively in groups and 
teams, the ability to apply ethical principles in solving business problems, 
and the ability to critically apply theory and practice in the functional areas 
of business to identify, analyze and solve business problems. 

BUSINESS MAJORS CORE COURSES 

The business majors require the successful completion of 36** credits of 
common business core courses. These core courses are designed to provide 
an exposure to fundamental business functions and consist of the following 
courses: 

ACCT 101 Principles of Accounting I/Financial 3 credits 
ACCT 102 Principles of Accounting 3 credits 
II/Managerial 
BADM 310 Business Law I 3 credits 
BADM 350 Business Ethics 3 credits 
BADM 405 Business Policy & Strategy 3 credits 
ECON 105 Macroeconomics 3 credits 
ECON 106 Microeconomics 3 credits 
ECON 406 Managerial Economics 3 credits 
FIN 280 Financial Management 3 credits 
MGMT 120 Principles of Management 3 credits 
MKTG 162 Principles of Integrated Marketing 3 credits 

**Majors are required to take two mathematics courses from the prefixes of 
STAT, MATH or MIS. One of the two must be STAT 135 – Business Statistics I. 

Students who select more than one major, or who select a major and minor 
or minors within business, may take only two overlapping courses with the 
exception of the business core. This policy establishes the uniqueness of 
each intellectual discipline and assures the intellectual integrity of dual 
majors and minors. 
No course taken as part of the business core or part of a business major (or 
minor) requirement may be taken on a Pass-Fail basis. Additionally, 
students who earn less than a “C” in these courses must repeat them. 

GPA REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEWS 

All students in the business department must maintain a minimum business 
and overall GPA of 2.75. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Business 60 Business 

All business majors and minors will have their cumulative and business GPAs 
reviewed when they meet with their faculty advisors for scheduling of the 
following semester’s courses (at minimum 2 times per year). At each 
meeting, students who fail to meet the GPA requirements will sign a form 
acknowledging their GPA deficiency and acknowledging an understanding 
that should their GPA not meet the requirement at the time they apply for 
graduation, they will NOT earn a degree in their major (minor) but instead 
will earn a B.A. degree in General Studies. 

This GPA acknowledgement process, along with the final decision to award 
a B.A. degree in General Studies if the student’s GPA is deficient at the time 
of application for graduation, also applies to transfer students. 

REPEAT COURSES 

Students who fail to earn a grade of C or better in any business program 
requirement must repeat the course. 

If the student does not receive a C (or better) after repeating the course, the 
student will not be permitted to re-take the course resulting in the inability 
to earn a major or minor in the field of study. 

ACCOUNTING MAJOR 

Program Director: Penny Hanes, MBA, CPA 

The goal of this program is to provide a sound education in all phases of the 
theory and application of accounting. Students enrolled in the Accounting 
major are introduced to the language of business and the principles of 
financial accounting. Those students who choose accounting as a major field 
of study will become professionally competent in advanced theories and 
applications of financial accounting, cost analysis, auditing, and tax 
procedures. 

The business department recommends that students who intend to practice 
as Certified Public Accountants contact the state in which they plan to reside 
concerning the educational requirements of that state. Candidates can sit for 
the CPA Exam in Pennsylvania with less than 150 credits; however, they will 
be required to complete all 150 credits before they are eligible to apply for 
CPA licensure. Most states have credit requirements that exceed the 
minimum course requirements for graduation at Mercyhurst University. 
Check the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants’ webpage at 
www.aicpa.org for each state’s requirements. Keep in mind that this site is 
not as up to date as the states’ own websites, which can be accessed 
through the AICPA home page. Those students who wish to practice as 
Chartered Accountants in Canada must meet additional educational 
requirements. 

The department offers two options for students: 

(1) The Accounting major, with 121 credit hours, is offered for students who 
wish to work in the private (non-public) sector of accounting. These 
graduates are eligible to sit for the Certified Management Accountant (CMA) 
Exam. 
(2) A double major in Accounting and Finance is offered for students who 
wish to earn additional credit hours and be eligible to sit for both the 
Certified Public Accountant and the Certified Financial Planner Exams. This 
option provides students with the opportunity to work in public accounting 

and/or finance upon graduation. 
Note: Students with junior or senior standing who are accepted into the 
Accounting major or the Accounting/Finance double major should 
recognize that they may not be able to meet all degree requirements 
without additional study beyond the traditional four years. 

ACCOUNTING CORE REQUIREMENTS 

ACCT 101 Principles of Accounting I/Financial 3 credits 
ACCT 102 Principles of Accounting II/Managerial 3 credits 
BADM 310 Business Law I 3 credits 
BADM 350 Business Ethics 3 credits 
BADM 405 Business Policy & Strategy 3 credits 
ECON 105 Macroeconomics 3 credits 
ECON 106 Microeconomics 3 credits 
ECON 406 Managerial Economics 3 credits 
FIN 280 Financial Management 3 credits 
MGMT 120 Principles of Management 3 credits 
MKTG 162 Principles of Integrated Marketing 3 credits 

**Majors are required to take two mathematics courses from the prefixes of 
STAT, MATH or MIS. One of the two must be STAT 135 – Business Statistics I. 

ACCOUNTING MAJOR REQUIREMENTS 

ACCT 201 Intermediate Accounting I 3 credits 
ACCT 202 Intermediate Accounting II 3 credits 
ACCT 230 Tax Accounting 3 credits 
ACCT 335 Corporate Tax Accounting 3 credits 
ACCT 340 Cost Accounting 3 credits 
ACCT 401 Advanced Accounting 3 credits 
ACCT 410 Auditing 3 credits 

BUSINESS ECONOMICS 

Program Director: Juan Argaez, Ph.D. 

The Business Economics major provides excellent preparation for students 
who wish to graduate with a solid grounding in economic fundamentals 
along with training in the functional areas of business such as finance, 
accounting, marketing, and management. An undergraduate major in 
business economics provides background which is applicable for jobs in 
banking, consulting, investment and brokerage houses, sales and 
marketing, as well as positions as financial analysts, risk management 
analysts, forecasters, or analyst staff members in litigation, mergers, or 
acquisition departments. The business economics background also leads to a 
diversity of opportunities for those who wish to pursue graduate education 
in Economics and Finance, for those interested in pursuing an MBA, or for 
those students considering a degree in law. Many public policy issues have a 
strong economic dimension; therefore, economics is a natural 
undergraduate major for those interested in a graduate degree in public 
policy, public administration, or public health. Many opportunities also exist 
for business economics students in various government agencies at the 
federal, state, or local levels as analysts and researchers. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Business 61 Business 

BUSINESS ECONOMICS CORE REQUIREMENTS 

ACCT 101 Principles of Accounting I/Financial 3 credits 
ACCT 102 Principles of Accounting II/Managerial 3 credits 
BADM 310 Business Law I 3 credits 
BADM 350 Business Ethics 3 credits 
BADM 405 Business Policy & Strategy 3 credits 
ECON 105 Macroeconomics 3 credits 
ECON 106 Microeconomics 3 credits 
ECON 406 Managerial Economics 3 credits 

FIN 280 Financial Management 3 credits 
MGMT 120 Principles of Management 3 credits 
MKTG 162 Principles of Integrated Marketing 3 credits 
**Majors are required to take two mathematics courses from the prefixes of STAT, 
MATH or MIS. One of the two must be STAT 135 – Business Statistics I. 

BUSINESS ECONOMICS MAJOR REQUIREMENTS 

ECON 200 International Economics 3 credits 
ECON 250 Economics of Poverty 3 credits 
ECON 305 Intermediate Macroeconomics 3 credits 
ECON 306 Intermediate Microeconomics 3 credits 
FIN 345 Financial Institutions & Markets 3 credits 
FIN 360 International Finance 3 credits 
MIS 150 Data Science 3 credits 
POLI 380 Politics of the Global Economy 3 credits 

FINANCE 

Program Director: Robert Cullen, MBA, CFP 

This program is designed to provide a sound education in the art and science 
of managing money. Students pursue careers in the rapidly growing field of 
financial services at banks, credit unions, insurance companies, brokerage 
firms, law firms, or credit counseling organizations. Some hold positions in 
employee benefits, pensions or corporate finance departments. Those 
choosing financial planning seek the satisfaction of helping people from 
various walks of life solve their financial problems and reach their financial 
goals. With the assistance of their academic advisor, students choose the 
upper-level courses that best fit with their individual career objectives. The 
Finance Program is registered with the Certified Financial Planner Board of 
Standards. Finance majors are thus eligible to sit for the CFP exam. 

FINANCE CORE REQUIREMENTS 

ACCT 101 Principles of Accounting I/Financial 3 credits 
ACCT 102 Principles of Accounting 3 credits 

II/Managerial 
BADM 310 Business Law I 3 credits 
BADM 350 Business Ethics 3 credits 
BADM 405 Business Policy & Strategy 3 credits 
ECON 105 Macroeconomics 3 credits 
ECON 106 Microeconomics 3 credits 
ECON 406 Managerial Economics 3 credits 
FIN 280 Financial Management 3 credits 
MGMT 120 Principles of Management 3 credits 
MKTG 162 Principles of Integrated Marketing 3 credits 

**Majors are required to take two mathematics courses from the prefixes of 
STAT, MATH or MIS. One of the two must be STAT 135 – Business Statistics I. 

FINANCE MAJOR REQUIREMENTS 

ACCT 230 Tax Accounting 3 credits 
FIN 220 Introduction to Financial Planning 3 credits 
FIN 301 Investments 3 credits 
FIN 345 Financial Institutions and Markets 3 credits 

Additional Requirements -Choose four (4) 
Note: FIN 310, 315, 410 and 490 are required for the CFP 
Examination 

FIN 310 Employee Benefits and Retirement 3 credits 

Planning 
FIN 315 Principles of Risk Management 3 credits 
FIN 410 Estate Planning 3 credits 
FIN 490 Financial Plan Development 3 credits 
Other options 
ACCT 201 Intermediate Accounting I 3 credits 
ACCT 335 Corporate Tax Accounting 3 credits 
FIN 360 International Finance 3 credits 
FIN 380 Corporate Finance 3 credits 
FIN 475 Finance Internship 3 credits 

HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 

Program Director: Kim Zacherl, MBA, SPHR, SHRM-SCP 

The human resource management function includes a variety of activities, 
and key among them are determining staffing needs, recruiting and training 
the best employees, ensuring that employees are motivated and high-
performing, dealing with performance issues, and ensuring that 
management practices conform to various government regulations. 
Activities of the human resource management practitioner also include 
managing employee benefits and compensation, employee records, and 
personnel and privacy policies. Students who graduate with a major in 
human resource management will be able to provide their skills, knowledge 
and understanding of human resource functions to organizations in the for-
profit, non-profit, and public sectors of the economy. Through the proper 
selection of coursework, the student can prepare for the certification 
examinations offered by the Society of Human Resource Management. 

HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT CORE REQUIREMENTS 

ACCT 101 Principles of Accounting I/Financial 3 credits 
ACCT 102 Principles of Accounting II/Managerial 3 credits 
BADM 310 Business Law I 3 credits 
BADM 350 Business Ethics 3 credits 
BADM 405 Business Policy & Strategy 3 credits 
ECON 105 Macroeconomics 3 credits 
ECON 106 Microeconomics 3 credits 
ECON 406 Managerial Economics 3 credits 
FIN 280 Financial Management 3 credits 
MGMT 120 Principles of Management 3 credits 
MKTG 162 Principles of Integrated Marketing 3 credits 
**Majors are required to take two mathematics courses from the prefixes of 
STAT, MATH or MIS. One of the two must be STAT 135 – Business Statistics I. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Business 62 Business 

HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT MAJOR REQUIREMENTS 

FIN 310 Employee Benefits and Retirement 3 credits 
Planning 
MGMT 206 Human Resource Management 3 credits 
MGMT 226 Human Behavior in Organizations 3 credits 
MGMT 290 Mergers and Acquisitions 3 credits 
MGMT 316 Labor/Management Relations 3 credits 
MGMT 340 Recruitment & Selection 3 credits 
MGMT 345 Training & Development 3 credits 
MGMT 476 Human Resource Management 3 credits 
Internship 
Recommended Elective: 
PSYC 101 Introduction to Psychology 3 credits 
OR 
SOC 100 Introduction to Sociology 3 credits 
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MAJOR 

Program Director: Selin Yalcindag, Ph.D. 

This major is designed to prepare students for management positions in 
international trade, manufacturing, banking, financial, and governmental 
organizations, as well as for entry into graduate coursework. The 
International Business major offers a strong business core, specialized 
international business courses for the upper level student, and language and 
culture courses leading to fluency in the target language (Spanish, French, 
Russian or Mandarin). The program, with its emphasis on business 
language, and culture, provides the Mercyhurst University graduate with a 
unique degree that is challenging and rigorous in its requirements. Students 
who are enrolled in this major will have an academic advisor from both 
Business and the World Languages and Cultures department. Students must 
meet with their language advisor to determine placement. 

INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS REQUIREMENTS 

ACCT 101 Principles of Accounting I/Financial 3 credits 
ACCT 102 Principles of Accounting 3 credits 

II/Managerial 
BADM 275 Operations Management 3 credits 
BADM 285 Global Operations & Supply Chain 3 credits 

Management 
BADM 310 Business Law I 3 credits 
BADM 350 Business Ethics 3 credits 
BADM 405 Business Policy & Strategy 3 credits 
ECON 105 Macroeconomics 3 credits 
ECON 106 Microeconomics 3 credits 
ECON 200 International Economics 3 credits 
ECON 406 Managerial Economics 3 credits 
FIN 280 Financial Management 3 credits 
FIN 360 International Finance 3 credits 
MGMT 120 Principles of Management 3 credits 
MGMT 226 Human Behavior in Organizations 3 credits 
MKTG 162 Principles of Integrated Marketing 3 credits 
MKTG 200 International Marketing 3 credits 

Management 
International Business students must select five (5) language classes, 

including one language related culture course and a language for 
business class. All language courses must have the same prefix. 15 
credits 

MANAGEMENT 

Program Director: Kris Gossett, DBA 

The Management major is designed to provide students with an 
understanding of management and its roles, tasks, and practices. This 
program provides a broad preparation in the basics of business 
management, including the coordination of human, material, and financial 
resources. It deals with the skills and knowledge necessary to oversee the 
activities and resources of a business in order to accomplish organizational 
goals. To be an effective manager, an individual needs to possess a broad 
knowledge of the workings of businesses, organizations, and the economy, 
in addition to an understanding of the behavior of people. Students who 
graduate with a Business Management major are ideally suited for entry-
level managerial careers in banking, retail, manufacturing, human 
resources, government agencies, and for enrollment in graduate school 
programs. 

MANAGEMENT CORE REQUIREMENTS 

ACCT 101 Principles of Accounting I/Financial 3 credits 
ACCT 102 Principles of Accounting II/Managerial 3 credits 
BADM 310 Business Law I 3 credits 
BADM 350 Business Ethics 3 credits 
BADM 405 Business Policy & Strategy 3 credits 
ECON 105 Macroeconomics 3 credits 
ECON 106 Microeconomics 3 credits 
ECON 406 Managerial Economics 3 credits 
FIN 280 Financial Management 3 credits 
MGMT 120 Principles of Management 3 credits 
MKTG 162 Principles of Integrated Marketing 3 credits 

**Majors are required to take two mathematics courses from the prefixes of 
STAT, MATH or MIS. One of the two must be STAT 135 – Business Statistics I 

MANAGEMENT MAJOR REQUIREMENTS 

BADM 250 Entrepreneurship 3 credits 
BADM 275 Principles of Operations Management 3 credits 
BADM 285 Global Operations & Supply Chain 3 credits 

Management 
COM 100 Oral Communication 3 credits 
ECON 200 International Economics 3 credits 
OR 
FIN 360 International Finance 3 credits 
OR 
MKTG 200 International Marketing Management 3 credits 
MGMT 206 Human Resource Management 3 credits 
MGMT 226 Human Behavior in Organizations 3 credits 
MGMT 405 Quality Leadership 3 credits 

Recommended Elective: 

MGMT 475 Management Internship 3 credits 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Business 63 Business 

MARKETING MAJOR 

Program Director: Adrienne Foos, Ph.D. 

The Marketing major provides students with a solid foundation in all areas 
of business administration and the practical and theoretical background 
necessary to address issues related to product development, product pricing 
strategies, distribution channels, and product promotion. 

Our specialized and rigorous courses prepare students to pursue careers in 
retail and sales management, marketing research, advertising and 
promotion, product development, and industrial marketing. 

MARKETING CORE REQUIREMENTS 

ACCT 101 Principles of Accounting I/Financial 3 credits 
ACCT 102 Principles of Accounting II/Managerial 3 credits 
BADM 310 Business Law I 3 credits 
BADM 350 Business Ethics 3 credits 
BADM 405 Business Policy & Strategy 3 credits 
ECON 105 Macroeconomics 3 credits 
ECON 106 Microeconomics 3 credits 
ECON 406 Managerial Economics 3 credits 
FIN 280 Financial Management 3 credits 
MGMT 120 Principles of Management 3 credits 
MKTG 162 Principles of Integrated Marketing 3 credits 

**Majors are required to take two mathematics courses from the prefixes of 
STAT, MATH or MIS. One of the two must be STAT 135 – Business Statistics I 

MARKETING MAJOR REQUIREMENTS 

MKTG 200 International Marketing 3 credits 

Management 
MKTG 301 Consumer Behavior 3 credits 
MKTG 317 Sales Management 3 credits 
MKTG 347 Advertising & Branding Strategies 3 credits 
MKTG 357 Marketing Research 3 credits 
MKTG 406 Marketing Management 3 credits 
MKTG 475 Marketing Internship 3 credits 

SPORT BUSINESS MANAGEMENT MAJOR 

Program Director: William Jeffress, MBA 

This program is designed to prepare students for careers in the sport 
industry. It provides broad preparation in the functional business areas 
through completion of the business core and an emphasis on marketing and 
human resource management through upper-level coursework. Internships 
are recommended to enhance the educational background and to provide 
students with both industry experience and potential future employment 
opportunities. 

Career opportunities include positions as a marketing and management 
account executive for major and minor league sport organizations; high 
school and collegiate athletic program director; sports information director; 
media relations director; marketing director; event manager for local, 
national, and international Olympic-style events; facilities manager for 

health and fitness clubs; and sales representative in the sporting goods 
industry. 

SPORT BUSINESS MANAGEMENT CORE REQUIREMENTS 

ACCT 101 Principles of Accounting I/Financial 3 credits 
ACCT 102 Principles of Accounting II/Managerial 3 credits 
BADM 310 Business Law I 3 credits 
BADM 350 Business Ethics 3 credits 
BADM 405 Business Policy & Strategy 3 credits 
ECON 105 Macroeconomics 3 credits 
ECON 106 Microeconomics 3 credits 
ECON 406 Managerial Economics 3 credits 
FIN 280 Financial Management 3 credits 
MGMT 120 Principles of Management 3 credits 
MKTG 162 Principles of Integrated Marketing 3 credits 

**Majors are required to take two mathematics courses from the prefixes of 
STAT, MATH or MIS. One of the two must be STAT 135 – Business Statistics I 

SPORT BUSINESS MANAGEMENT MAJOR REQUIREMENTS 

SBM 100 Introduction to the Sport Industry 3 credits 
SBM 150 Intercollegiate Practicum 1 credit 
SBM 210 Sport Marketing 3 credits 
SBM 220 Legal & Ethical Issues of Sport 3 credits 
SBM 230 Special Topics I 3 credits 
SBM 310 Facility and Event Management 3 credits 
SBM 330 Special Topics II 3 credits 
SBM 410 Sport in Society 3 credits 
SBM 420 Sport Governance 3 credits 
SBM 430 Internship 3 credits 

MINOR PROGRAMS 

The Business department offers four minor programs for interested 
students: Accounting, Business Administration, Economics, and Marketing. 
The minor program in Business Administration is intended for non-Business 
majors only. No minor course may be taken on a pass-fail basis, and 
students must earn a minimum GPA of 2.75 in the required business courses 
to meet minor program requirements. Students who fail to earn a grade of 
“C” or better in a required business course must repeat the course. 

MINOR REQUIREMENTS ACCOUNTING 

ACCT 101 Principles of Accounting I/ Financial 3 credits 
ACCT 102 Principles of Accounting II/ 3 credits 

Managerial 
ACCT 201 Intermediate Accounting I 3 credits 
ACCT 202 Intermediate Accounting II 3 credits 
ACCT 230 Tax Accounting 3 credits 
ACCT 340 Cost Accounting 3 credits 
ACCT 401 Advanced Accounting 3 credits 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Business 64 Business 

MINOR REQUIREMENTS BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION 
FOR NON-BUSINESS MAJORS ONLY 

ACCT 101 Principles of Accounting I/Financial 3 credits 
ACCT 102 Principles of Accounting II/Managerial 3 credits 
BADM 310 Business Law I 3 credits 
ECON 105 Macroeconomics 3 credits 
ECON 106 Microeconomics 3 credits 
FIN 280 Financial Management 3 credits 
MGMT 120 Principles of Management 3 credits 
MKTG 162 Principles of Integrated Marketing 3 credits 
MINOR REQUIREMENTS ECONOMICS 
ECON 105 Macroeconomics 3 credits 
ECON 106 Microeconomics 3 credits 
ECON 200 International Economics 3 credits 
ECON 250 Economics of Poverty 3 credits 
ECON 305 Intermediate Macroeconomics 3 credits 
ECON 306 Intermediate Microeconomics 3 credits 
FIN 360 International Finance 3 credits 

MINOR REQUIREMENTS MARKETING 

ECON 106 Microeconomics 3 credits 
MKTG 162 Principles of Integrated Marketing 3 credits 
MKTG 301 Consumer Behavior 3 credits 
MKTG 317 Sales Management 3 credits 
MKTG 347 Advertising & Branding Strategies 3 credits 
MKTG 357 Marketing Research 3 credits 
MKTG 406 Marketing Management 3 credits 

CONTRACT MAJORS 

Students may elect to develop a business contract major or minor program 
that is not currently listed in the University catalog. An individualized 
contract major or minor allows a student to choose offerings from several 
disciplines that meet specific business career options or goals. Students 
selecting this option must seek advice from a business faculty member as 
well as input from a faculty member of the second discipline. Students must 
meet all regulations established in the Academic Affairs section of the 
current university catalog. 

Departmental approval must be obtained from the dean or associate dean of 
the Walker College of Business and the final approval and decision rests with 
the Office for Academic Affairs. 

MASTER OF SCIENCE IN ORGANIZATIONAL LEADERSHIP 

4 + 1 Accelerated Program 

Walker School of Business has partnered with the graduate program in 
Organizational Leadership to make available a 4 + 1 Accelerated Program 
for eligible students. This program is designed to enhance career 
opportunities for our graduates at an affordable cost. Eligible students will 
be able to earn both a Baccalaureate degree in Business and a Master of 
Science degree in Organizational Leadership using this 5-year plan. 

Students may choose to earn a master’s degree in Organizational Leadership 
alone or, for those seeking Certification for Public Accounting, an Accounting 
concentration is available. Sophomore and junior students can apply to 
begin taking graduate courses in either their junior or senior year with a 
combined course load maximum of 18 credits (registering for both 
undergraduate and graduate courses). 

Eligibility: Student must have at least a 3.0 GPA in undergraduate studies. 

Application process: 

1. Meet with the OL 4+1 program advisor to review and complete an 
application packet. 
2. Graduate admissions will register the students for a maximum of 18 
combined credits per semester. Undergraduate flat rate tuition applies until 
bachelor degree has been completed. 
3. Prior to starting the fifth year, students must complete all application 
requirements. 
4. Students must enroll in summer classes in order to complete the program 
within five years. 
5. Students must maintain a 3.0 GPA throughout the program. 
6. Students must complete all undergraduate degree requirements 
including 121 undergraduate credit hours and all graduate degree 
requirements including 33 graduate credit hours to obtain both degrees. 
ASSOCIATE DEGREE PROGRAMS 

An associate degree in Business Administration is administered through the 
Office of Graduate and Continuing Education. Students enrolled in the four-
year program are not eligible for the Associate Degree. A minimum of 60 
credits is required for the completion of the associate degree. 

Students must earn an overall 2.0 GPA as well as a 2.75 GPA in the required 
business courses in order to meet graduation requirements. No business 
courses may be taken on a pass-fail basis. Additionally, students who fail to 
earn a grade of “C” or better in a required business course must repeat the 
course. Students who wish to transfer to a four-year baccalaureate program 
in the Walker College Business Department must meet all Business 
Department requirements. 

Requirements for the associate degree program can be obtained by 
contacting the Office of Graduate and Continuing Education. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


CATHOLIC STUDIES PROGRAM 65 CATHOLIC STUDIES PROGRAM 


CATHOLIC STUDIES PROGRAM 
INTERDISCIPLINARY MINOR 

DIRECTOR: 

Mary Hembrow Snyder, Ph.D. 

MISSION STATEMENT 

The Catholic Studies Program at Mercyhurst incarnates the Catholic identity 
and Mercy heritage of the university. Inspired by the university’s core 
values, it aims to deepen appreciation of Catholicism, both past and present, 
through commitment to serious intellectual inquiry and hospitable dialogue 
in an atmosphere where faith and reason flourish. The program’s primary 
focus will be interdisciplinary engagement with the Catholic Intellectual 
Tradition through a variety of scholarly disciplines. 

PROGRAM STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 

Discover the meaning and richness of the Catholic Intellectual Tradition as 
found across academic disciplines 

Analyze the development of Catholic creeds, doctrines, traditions, spiritual 
practices, aesthetic contributions, historically and globally 

Compare and contrast a variety of perspectives that both support and 
challenge church teaching on a variety of contemporary issues 

CATHOLIC STUDIES MINOR REQUIREMENTS 

The Catholic Studies Minor is composed of six three-credit courses chosen 
from the following areas: 

Catholic Studies: Courses specifically designed to deepen understanding of 
the Catholic tradition, both past and present. All students seeking the minor 
must take CST 100, Exploring Catholicism, and one other course from this 
category. 

Religious Studies: One, of many courses in Religious Studies, will be 
designated as meeting this requirement. Only one course may count for 
both Religious Studies and the Catholic Studies minor; that course must 
have a RLST or CST designation. 

Interdisciplinary Studies: Any one course in this category, designated 
with the CST prefix, is acceptable. 

CATHOLIC STUDIES/CST (Choose 2) 

CST 100 Exploring Catholicism 3 credits 
CST210 Many Faces of Mary 3 credits 
CST225 Catholicism and Social Justice 3 credits 
CST250 Theology of Church 3 credits 
CST 260 Vatican II 3 credits 
CST280 Desert Mothers and Fathers 3 credits 
CST 290 Catholic Spirituality 3 credits 
CST295 Catholic Values 3 credits 
CST300 Foundations for Youth & Young Adult 3 credits 

Ministry 
CST400 Selected Topics in the Catholic Tradition 3 credits 

RELIGIOUS STUDIES (Choose 2) 

RLST 100 
RLST 110 
RLST 205 
RLST 210 
RLST 235 
RLST 255 

RLST 265 
RLST 266 
RLST 270 
RLST 275 
RLST 280 
RLST 305 
RLST 315 
RLST 310 
RLST345 
RLST 375 
RLST 230 
RLST 385 
RLST 405 
RLST 420 
RLST 440 

What is Religion? 3 credits 
Sacred Texts 3 credits 
Western Christian Heritage 3 credits 
New Testament & Christian Origins 3 credits 
Sacred & Cinema 3 credits 
Religious Perspectives on Human 3 credits 
Relationships 
American Religion 3 credits 
Globalized Religion 3 credits 
Women & Scripture 3 credits 
Liberation, Religion & Society 3 credits 
Prophetic Traditions 3 credits 
Death and Dying 3 credits 
Wisdom Literature 3 credits 
Evolving Religion 3 credits 
Philosophy of Religion 3 credits 
Religion & the Environment 3 credits 
Christology 3 credits 
Poetry of the Sacred 3 credits 
Social Ethics 3 credits 
Mysticism 3 credits 
Peace & Justice 3 credits 

INTERDISCIPLINARY STUDIES (Choose 2) 

FREN 135 Religion, Politics & Drama in 17th Century 3 credits 

France 
DANC 175 Liturgical Dance 3 credits 
POLI 201 Catholic Social & Political Thought 3 credits 
ECON 250 Economics of Poverty 3 credits 
PHIL 270 Foundations of Catholic Philosophy 3 credits 
ENGL 328 Special Topics in Literature: The Catholic 3 credits 

Novel 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Center for English Language Studies 66 Center for English Language Studies 

Center for English Language Studies 

DIRECTOR: 

Janelle L. Newman 

FACULTY: 

Instructors: 

Janelle L. Newman, M.A. 

MISSION STATEMENT 

The Center for English Language Studies (CELS) is the home of the 
International Foundations Program (IFP) and the Specialized English 
Language Programs (SELP). The Center seeks to extend the university’s core 
value of compassionate hospitality to students who need English language 
training in order to matriculate as undergraduate and graduate students. 
Our primary goal is to link English language learners with the appropriate 
academic and social supports so they can become successful members of the 
Mercyhurst student body. 

Applicants who do not meet the university’s language proficiency standards 
(TOEFL 79-80 and IELTS 6.5) or non-degree seeking students wishing to 
improve their English language may participate in credit bearing IFP courses 
the Center for English Language Studies offers. After acceptance, students 
complete English study in small classes that integrate the skills of reading, 
writing, listening, speaking, and grammar. All CELS programs include a 
strong cultural component throughout so students gain a greater 
understanding of the Mercyhurst context and greater region, providing the 
best conditions for language learning. In conjunction with Academic 
Support and the university’s Writing Center, CELS works to support students 
in their academic development within and beyond the IFP and SELP through 
academic counseling, advising, and tutoring. 

As stated in the university mission, “[T]he university community is inspired 
by the image of students whose choices, in life and work, will enable them 
to realize the human and spiritual values embedded in everyday realities 
and to exercise leadership in service toward a just world.” The Center for 
English Language Studies at Mercyhurst enables students from diverse 
backgrounds to enter into this community and enrich it with their unique 
contributions. 

INTERNATIONAL FOUNDATIONS PROGRAM (IFP) 

The International Foundations Program is a two-semester experience that 
allows students to take credit-bearing courses at Mercyhurst as well as 
receive additional language support through courses focused on enriching 
their language development. Acceptance into IFP is based on TOEFL and 
IELTS scores where students must demonstrate an adequate command of 
the English language (generally a minimum overall score of 5.0 on IELTS). 
In the first semester, students take WL 108: Listening and Speaking for 
Academic Success, WL 110: Reading and Writing for Academic Success, and 

two academic courses. In the second semester, students take WL 210: 
Digital Literacy and three to four academic courses (including COMP 110: 
Composition and COMP 100: Critical and Evaluative Reading). 

Specialized English Language Programs (SELP) 
In addition, we develop relationships with other international student 
groups and institutions to create specialized language programs in English. 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS: FOR THE INTERNATIONAL FOUNDATIONS 
PROGRAM 

WL 108: Listening and Speaking for Academic Success 

The course emphasizes effective English listening and speaking skills 
required in Mercyhurst's core and major courses. In class, students will learn 
strategies for improving communication as well as participate in extensive 
listening and speaking practice with academic topics. Prerequisite: 
Director’s approval. 3 credits. 

WL 110: Reading and Writing for Academic Success 

The course emphasizes effective English reading and writing skills that are 
required in Mercyhurst's core and major courses. In class, students will learn 
strategies for reading and writing in academic genres; read multiple, 
complex texts in a linguistically supportive environment; and participate in 
extensive drafting and revision processes. Prerequisite: Director’s approval. 3 
credits. 

WL 210: Digital Literacy 

The course emphasizes effective English reading, writing, listening, and 
speaking skills around the theme of technology use in daily life. In class, 
students will learn to responsibly use the technology tools available at 
Mercyhurst and those freely available on the web in order to effectively 
research, discuss, and present key topics in technology literacy. Prerequisite: 
WL 108, 110, or director approval. 3 credits. 

WL 508: Listening and Speaking for Academic Success 

The course emphasizes effective English listening and speaking skills 
required in Mercyhurst's core and major courses. In class, students will learn 
strategies for improving communication as well as participate in extensive 
listening and speaking practice with academic topics. Students registered in 
the graduate section of the course will have an additional research/practical 
application project which demonstrates an in-depth, integrated 
understanding of the content at the graduate level. Prerequisite: Director’s 
approval. 3 credits. 

WL 510: Reading and Writing for Academic Success 

The course emphasizes effective English reading and writing skills that are 
required in Mercyhurst's core and major courses. In class, students will learn 
strategies for reading and writing in academic genres; read multiple, 
complex texts in a linguistically supportive environment; and participate in 
extensive drafting and revision processes. Students registered in the 
graduate section of the course will have an additional research/practical 
application project which demonstrates an in-depth, integrated 
understanding of the content at the graduate level. Prerequisite: Director’s 
approval. 3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Center for English Language Studies 67 Center for English Language Studies 

WL 520: Digital Literacy 

The course emphasizes effective English reading, writing, listening, and 
speaking skills around the theme of technology use in daily life. In class, 
students will learn to responsibly use the technology tools available at 
Mercyhurst and those freely available on the web in order to effectively 
research, discuss, and present key topics in technology literacy. Students 
registered in the graduate section of the course will have an additional 
research/practical application project which demonstrates an in-depth, 
integrated understanding of the content at the graduate level. Prerequisite: 
WL 508 and 510. 3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


CHEMISTRY AND BIOCHEMISTRY 68 CHEMISTRY AND BIOCHEMISTRY 


CHEMISTRY AND BIOCHEMISTRY 

DEPARTMENT CHAIR 

Clint Jones, Ph.D. 

FACULTY 

Professor: 

Jack D. Williams, Ph.D. 

Associate Professors: 

Ronald Brown, Ph.D.; Clint Jones, Ph.D.; Amy Parente, Ph.D. 

Assistant Professors: 

Amy Danowitz, Ph.D; Christopher Taylor, Ph.D. 

Laboratory Manager: 

Carl Voltz, B.S. 

INTRODUCTION 

The curriculum of the Department is accredited by the American Chemical 
Society (ACS) and is designed to support and prepare students for a wide 
range of potential career opportunities and pathways. Our students find 
their obtained skills and experiences are ideal preparation (i) for graduate 
work and professional schools in the sciences or medicine, (ii) to develop the 
technical background required for industrial or commercial positions, or (iii) 
to teach at the secondary school level. 

The Department offers programs that lead to Bachelor of Science degrees in 
both Chemistry and Biochemistry. A Bachelor of Arts degree is also offered in 
Chemistry. A student may elect to earn American Chemical Society (ACS) 
degree certification of his/her bachelor's degree by meeting the 
requirements of the ACS Committee on Professional Training. In brief, 
requirements for an ACS certified degree are slightly more stringent than 
departmental requirements for graduation and include: Earning credits in all 
five sub-disciplines of chemistry, earning a minimum of 12 semester hours 
of in-depth coursework, documenting at least 400 hours of laboratory work 
beyond the introductory level, conducting research alongside a faculty 
member and authoring a well-written, comprehensive and well-
documented thesis that includes safety considerations where appropriate. 
Certification in Chemistry Education is also offered through our department. 
Students pursuing certification in Chemistry Education earn a Chemistry 
degree prior to enrolling in the Master’s Program in Secondary Education at 
Mercyhurst, which can then be completed as a 1-year or 2-year program. 

MISSION STATEMENT 

The Department is committed to the education and training of the next 
generation of scientists. Because the nature of scientific endeavors evolves, 
the most important skills students in all scientific disciplines can possess are 
independent reasoning and problem-solving abilities. The development of 

these skills in our programs and courses is facilitated by the following 
tenets: 
A student-centered approach to scientific inquiry within our Department. 
This immersion of students in the scientific process extends to all phases of 
our scholarly pursuits, including experimental design, data acquisition, data 
analysis and communication to the scientific community. 


A focus upon the core scientific principles that constitute the foundation of 
all applications of science and technology. This focus is coupled with an 
experience-based knowledge of career related fields that are attractive to 
students. 


A commitment to working with students of all experiences and 
backgrounds, including those who are under-represented in the sciences. An 
emphasis is placed upon mentoring, including the processes of academic 
advisement, research mentoring and sophomore review. 


The firm adherence to a clear set of academic standards that is necessary for 
the success of our students in current scientific disciplines. 


The Department believes one of its strengths is the integration of 
undergraduate chemistry research opportunities in the curriculum 
culminating in the senior capstone experience. The student-centered 
research projects overseen by our faculty span a range of methods to 
address chemical problems in organic synthesis, health issues, 
nanotechnology and alternative energy. Seminars and poster presentations 
of research results at both regional and national research conferences are 
strongly encouraged. 


PROGRAM STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 

The chemistry and biochemistry programs require that students 
demonstrate: 

An understanding of the fundamental concepts in chemistry 
The ability to plan and conduct scientific experiments, using appropriate 
techniques and procedures 
Effective communication skills, including interpersonal communication 
(both oral and written) 
The ability to locate and understand peer-reviewed scientific literature and 
critically evaluate technical information 
The ability to recognize hazards, to conduct experiments safely and to 
manage chemicals, including chemical wastes 

The Department reserves the right to periodically conduct assessment of 
courses and experiences within the program. These assessments will not be 
tied to individual students, but rather be used for continual evaluation and 
improvement of the program as a whole. 

DEPARTMENT REQUIREMENTS 

All prerequisite coursework must be completed with a grade of C or better in 
order for any student to be eligible to enroll in a course. If this requirement 
has not been met prior to the start of the semester during which a student is 
enrolled, students will be removed from the course where the prerequisites 
have not been satisfactorily met. To be recommended for graduation in any 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


CHEMISTRY AND BIOCHEMISTRY 69 CHEMISTRY AND BIOCHEMISTRY 


of the Department’s degree programs a student must earn at least a 2.5 
grade point average in the required major and cognate courses and labs. 
When a course is re-taken, the GPA requirement includes both the original 
grade and the grade from the retake. A student also must earn a grade of at 
least C in any course from the major discipline that is to fulfill a degree 
requirement. No required science or math course may be taken on a 
Pass/Fail basis. No required courses for the major may be taken at another 
institution without departmental approval. Students are expected to attend 
all departmental seminars. Students pursuing teacher certification must 
maintain a cumulative 3.0 GPA in major required courses and receive a 
grade of at least C in each course. Students majoring in any of the 
Department’s programs must maintain an overall university GPA of 2.5. 

Credit will be granted for courses listing lecture and laboratory separately 
only if the lecture and laboratory components are taken concurrently, unless 
special permission is granted by the instructor and the Department. 
Withdrawal from one without withdrawal from the other is not allowed 
without permission from both the instructor and the Department. 
Permission to register for only one of the components will ordinarily be 
granted only when a student previously has successfully completed one of 
the components. All students seeking degrees in programs administered by 
the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry will undergo a review by 
department faculty at the completion of their sophomore level in their area 
of concentration, the Sophomore Review. Students must successfully 
complete the Sophomore Review in order to be accepted into the 
Department’s programs and continue their studies in the Department. 
Students eligible for Sophomore Review must have been at Mercyhurst 
University for at least 2 years and must have completed Calculus I (MATH 
170) and completed (or be in the process of completing) Organic Chemistry 
II (CHEM 242). Acceptance is based on the following criteria: (1) a minimum 
overall GPA of 2.5 in courses taken in the major concentration, (2) a 
minimum overall University GPA of 2.5, and (3) professional conduct. If a 
student does not pass the Sophomore Review, the student will not be 
allowed to enroll in any further courses required for programs administered 
by the Department. 

First-year students are required to meet with all departmental faculty 
members concerning research opportunities during their first year of study, 
which requires documentation to be submitted by March 15 of their first 
academic year. Students must also sign up with a research mentor and have 
a research plan by the time they apply for Sophomore Review. All students 
within the major must enroll in the courses Research I (CHEM 410) and 
Research I Lab (CHEM 412) during one of their academic years. 

CHEMISTRY MAJOR BACHELOR OF SCIENCE DEGREE REQUIREMENTS 

CHEM 121/122 General Chemistry I & Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 131/132 General Chemistry II & Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 230/231 Quantitative Analysis & Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 240/241 Organic Chemistry I & Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 242/243 Organic Chemistry II & Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 310 Advanced Inorganic Chemistry 3 credits 
CHEM 314 Advanced Organic Chemistry 3 credits 
OR 
CHEM 335/336 Spectral Interpretation & Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 331/332 Biochemistry I & Lab 4 credit 
CHEM 333/334 Instrumental Analysis & Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 341 Physical Chemistry I 3 credits 
CHEM 343 Experimental Physical Chemistry 3 credits 
CHEM 351 Physical Chemistry II 3 credits 
CHEM 409 Senior Seminar 1 credit 
CHEM 410 Research I 2 credits 
CHEM 412 Research I Lab 1 credit 
MATH 170 Calculus I 4 credits 
MATH 171 Calculus II 4 credits 
MATH 233 Calculus III 4 credits 
PHYS 201/203 General Physics I & Lab 4 credits 
PHYS 202/206 General Physics II & Lab 4 credits 
ONE Major Elective Course 3-4 credits 
MAJOR ELECTIVE COURSES 
BIO 142 Cellular and Molecular Biology 3 credits 
BIO 143 Cellular and Molecular Biology Lab 1 credit 
CHEM 314 Advanced Organic Chemistry 3 credits 
CHEM 335 Spectral Interpretation 3 credits 
CHEM 336 Spectral Interpretation Lab 1 credit 
CHEM 420 Chemical Biology 3 credits 
FRSC 360 Forensic Chemistry 3 credits 
MATH 240 Differential Equations 3 credits 
PHYS 310 Modern Physics 3 credits 
PHYS 370 Optics 3 credits 
PHYS 420 Quantum Mechanics 3 credits 

CHEMISTRY MAJOR BACHELOR OF ARTS DEGREE REQUIREMENTS 

The Bachelor of Arts degree requirements mirror those of the Bachelor of 
Science degree except for Calculus III and Research 1 Lab, which are not 
required. 

BIOCHEMISTRY MAJOR 

The Biochemistry major is ideal for students pursuing graduate and 
professional degrees in the biochemical or allied health professions. A 
strong background in chemistry and biology is provided with flexibility in 
biological and chemical specialization to enable students to pursue their 
personal interests in this dynamic field. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


CHEMISTRY AND BIOCHEMISTRY 70 CHEMISTRY AND BIOCHEMISTRY 


BACHELOR OF SCIENCE DEGREE REQUIREMENTS 

BIO 142 /143 Cellular and Molecular Biology & Lab 4 credits Required Courses (16 credit hours) 
BIO 310/311 Genetics & Lab 4 credits CHEM 121/122 General Chemistry I & Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 121/122 General Chemistry I & Lab 4 credits CHEM 131/132 General Chemistry II & Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 131/132 General Chemistry II & Lab 4 credits CHEM 240/241 Organic Chemistry I & Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 230/231 Quantitative Analysis & Lab 4 credits CHEM 242/243 Organic Chemistry II & Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 240/241 Organic Chemistry I & Lab 4 credits Chemistry Minor Elective Courses (9-12 credit hours)* 
CHEM 242/243 Organic Chemistry II & Lab 4 credits CHEM 199, 299, Independent Research 1-3 credits** 
CHEM 331/332 Biochemistry I & Lab 4 credits or 399 
CHEM 338/339 Biochemistry II & Lab 4 credits CHEM 230/231 Quantitative Analysis & Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 341 Physical Chemistry I 3 credits CHEM 310 Advanced Inorganic Chemistry 3 credits 
CHEM 409 Senior Seminar 1 credit CHEM 314 Advanced Organic Chemistry 3 credits 
CHEM 410 Research I 2 credits CHEM 331/332 Biochemistry I & Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 412 Research I Lab 1 credit CHEM 333/334 Instrumental Analysis & Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 420 Chemical Biology 3 credits CHEM 335/336 Spectral Interpretation & Lab 4 credits 
MATH 170 Calculus I 4 credits CHEM 341 Physical Chemistry I 3 credits 
MATH 171 Calculus II 4 credits CHEM 343 Experimental Physical Chemistry 3 credits 
PHYS 201/203 General Physics I & Lab 4 credits CHEM 351 Physical Chemistry II 3 credits 
PHYS 202/206 General Physics II & Lab 4 credits CHEM 420 Chemical Biology 3 credits 
At least TWO Major Elective Courses. Students must earn at least 8 credit * At least three courses are required. At least one course must have a lab 
hours in the list below. At least one course must have a BIO prefix. component or must be an independent lab course such as CHEM 199, 
MAJOR ELECTIVE COURSES 299, 399, or 343. 
BIO 200 /201 Microbiology & Lab 4 credits ** Only one Independent Research course may count toward the 
BIO 244/245 Histology & Lab 4 credits Chemistry Minor. 
BIO 330 /331 Immunology & Lab 4 credits 
BIO 334 /335 Human Anatomy & Lab 4 credits BIOCHEMISTRY MINOR 
BIO 344 /345 Human Physiology & Lab 4 credits To apply for a Biochemistry Minor, please contact a faculty member in the 
BIO 360 /361 Systems Physiology & Lab 4 credits Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry. A student must accrue at least 
BIO 430 Molecular Biology 3 credits 27 credit hours in the minor before graduation. All courses must be taken for 
CHEM 310 Advanced Inorganic Chemistry 3 credits a letter grade and completed with a C or better. No more than five courses in 
CHEM 314 Advanced Organic Chemistry 3 credits the Biochemistry Minor may be the same as those required within a 
CHEM 333/334 Instrumental Analysis & Lab 4 credits student’s major curriculum. 
CHEM 335/336 Spectral Interpretation & Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 343 Experimental Physical Chemistry 3 credits Required Courses (24 credit hours) 
CHEM 351 Physical Chemistry II 3 credits CHEM 121/122 General Chemistry I & Lab 4 credits 
FRSC 360 Forensic Chemistry 3 credits CHEM 131/132 General Chemistry II & Lab 4 credits 
MATH 233 Calculus III 4 credits CHEM 240/241 Organic Chemistry I & Lab 4 credits 

CHEM 242/243 Organic Chemistry II & Lab 4 credits 
CHEMISTRY MINOR CHEM 331/332 Biochemistry I & Lab 4 credits 
To apply for a Chemistry Minor, please contact a faculty member in the CHEM 338/339 Biochemistry II & Lab 4 credits 
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry. A student must accrue at least Biochemistry Minor Elective Courses (3-4 credit hours) 
25 credit hours in the minor before graduation. All courses must be taken for CHEM 199, 299, or 399 Independent Research 1-3 credits* 
a letter grade and completed with a C or better. No more than four courses CHEM 230/231 Quantitative Analysis& Lab 4 credits 
in the Chemistry Minor may be the same as those required within a CHEM 310 Advanced Inorganic Chemistry 3 credits 
student’s major curriculum. CHEM 314 Advanced Organic Chemistry 3 credits 

CHEM 335/336 Spectral Interpretation & Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 341 Physical Chemistry I 3 credits 
CHEM 420 Chemical Biology 3 credits 

* These courses have variable credits (1-3). At least 3 total credits of 
Independent Research are required for the Biochemistry Minor degree, which 
may be divided between different course numbers. 
2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


CHEMISTRY AND BIOCHEMISTRY 71 CHEMISTRY AND BIOCHEMISTRY 


CHEMISTRY EDUCATION CERTIFICATION 

Program Coordinator: Dr. Ronald Brown 

The Chemistry Education program at Mercyhurst University is a two-step 
process designed to give students a strong content knowledge before they 
master the pedagogical tools necessary to become expert teachers at the 
secondary level. Students interested in the program will first pursue a B.A. 
or B.S. degree in Chemistry. Students may replace CHEM 333/334: 
Instrumental Analysis/Lab with CHEM 338/339: Biochemistry II/lab and 
CHEM 351: Physical Chemistry II with PHYS 310: Modern Physics with 
permission of the department chair. 

Upon completion of their Chemistry degree, students may enroll in the 
master’s program in Secondary Education at Mercyhurst. A unique benefit of 
our program is that students who have completed their Chemistry degree at 
Mercyhurst may choose to complete the Master’s degree in an intensive 
one-year program. During the junior or senior year chemistry majors 
wishing to pursue the M.S. in Secondary Education will meet with the 
content area specialist in chemistry to schedule specific education electives, 
PECT tests and to obtain those clearances required for the Education 
curriculum and admission to the graduate program. Students may opt to 
attend a traditional 2-year M.S. program at Mercyhurst or an intense, 1-year 

M.S. program available to Mercyhurst undergraduates. This 4+1 program 
allows students to earn a bachelor’s degree in Chemistry, a M.S. in 
Secondary Education, and to become certified to teach in a five-year time 
period. While Mercyhurst students will complete the Chemistry degree as 
described, students who have earned bachelor's degrees from other 
institutions may also seek certification in Chemistry Education from 
Mercyhurst. The content requirements for the Chemistry Education 
Certification for those students are listed below. To be certified, the M.S. in 
Secondary Education must also be completed. Students who have earned a 
Chemistry or related degree from another institution will have their 
coursework evaluated against this content before enrolling in the Master’s 
program to determine what, if any, additional Chemistry coursework would 
need to be completed. 
CHEMISTRY EDUCATION CERTIFICATION: CONTENT REQUIREMENTS 

CHEM 121/122 General Chemistry I & Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 131/132 General Chemistry II & Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 230/231 Quantitative Analysis & Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 240/241 Organic Chemistry I & Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 242/243 Organic Chemistry II & Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 310 Advanced Inorganic Chemistry 3 credits 
CHEM 331/332 Biochemistry I & Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 333/334 Instrumental Analysis & Lab 4 credits 
OR 
CHEM 338/339 Biochemistry II & Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 341 Physical Chemistry 3 credits 
CHEM 343 Experimental Physical Chemistry 3 credits 
CHEM 351 Physical Chemistry II 3 credits 
OR 
PHYS 210 Modern Physics 3 credits 
CHEM 314 Advanced Organic Chemistry 3 credits 
OR 
CHEM 334/335 Spectral Interp. & Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 410 Research I 2 credits 
MATH 170 Calculus I 4 credits 
MATH 171 Calculus II 4 credits 
PHYS 201/203 General Physics I & Lab 4 credits 
PHYS 202/206 General Physics II & Lab 4 credits 

SUSTAINABILITY STUDIES CONCENTRATION (within the Chemistry 
department) 

In coordination with the Sustainability Studies Program at Mercyhurst, 
students majoring in Chemistry (B.A. or B.S.) or Biochemistry may pursue a 
concentration in Sustainability Studies. The goals of this program are to 
provide students with the following academic experiences: 

(1) An introductory environmental course (ENVS 105) and capstone research 
experience (SUST 399 or SUST 475) at the beginning and end of the 
academic program, respectively, to cohesively provide both an introduction 
to sustainability and an intensive real-world experiential learning 
component. (Tier I) 
(2) An interdisciplinary overview of the questions, problems and potential 
solutions comprising the broadly defined study of sustainability. Portions of 
this coursework may overlap with the core curriculum. Students must 
choose at least 4 courses from the Required/Elective list of courses given in 
the Sustainability portion of the catalog (not counting those in Tier I above). 
(Tier II) 
(3) A rigorous and science-centered study of how the chemistry and 
biochemistry disciplines intersect with sustainability. This will be arranged 
in coordination with the adviser and Departmental faculty, culminating in 
the capstone experience. (Tier III) 
2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Communication 72 Communication 

Communication 

DEPARTMENT CHAIR 

Brian R. Sheridan, M.A. 

FACULTY 

Lecturer: 

Brian R. Sheridan, M.A. 

Assistant Professor: 

James Lohrey, M.A. 

Adjunct: 

Meghan Waskiewicz, M.S. 

INTRODUCTION 

The curriculum of the department is designed to create students who are 
part digital storyteller, part multimedia specialist, and part data analyst. All 
communication professionals engage in similar functions (gathering 
information and data, creating, disseminating and evaluating messages) 
and must be prepared with basic skills including writing, speaking and 
visual communication along with the ability to develop a plan, organize, 
evaluate and think strategically. To accomplish this, students are required to 
complete a core sequence that covers areas of interpersonal and 
intrapersonal communication, research and data analysis, skill development 
(technical and writing), and professional development. The curriculum 
employs a “learn by doing” approach where the student builds their 
portfolio of skills in every class. Upon graduation, our students are prepared 
for entry to the communication industry in high-paying areas that include 
traditional media, social media, public relations, strategic communication, 
fundraising and event planning. 

MISSION STATEMENT 

The Department of Communication seeks to provide a wide-lens, hands-on 
and whole person approach to communication that will prepare students for 
an entry-level position in a variety of industries in and relating to the field of 
communication or to pursue study at the graduate level. To this end we: 

• Provide a generalized curriculum in communication while 
simultaneously providing students the opportunity to narrow their focus 
within one or more areas of expertise; 
• Facilitate a whole-student focus and hands-on approach to 
learning that helps students develop practical skills as well as ethics, critical 
thinking abilities and creativity providing the basis for lifelong learning 
while promoting the dignity of work; and 
• Foster a community of learning and influence between students, 
alumni, faculty, administration and the community. 
LEARNING GOALS AND OUTCOMES 

A bachelor’s degree in Communication from Mercyhurst University prepares 
students to either enter the workforce at the entry level or to pursue 
graduate education. The learning outcomes were derived from and continue 

to be modified by studies of the needs of the communication industry as 
well as surveys and interviews with alumni who are now working in the 
field as well as through data collected relating to the knowledge, skills, and 
abilities demanded from employers in the field of communication. 

We recognize that because the field of communication is multi-faceted and 
always expanding, it is important to not simply teach students the skills 
they need to enter the workforce—the skills used today very well may be 
outdated within the next decade. Instead, we provide not only the most upto-
date skills to enter the field of communication but also theoretical 
knowledge paired with critical thinking, creativity and ethical skills which 
will allow our graduates to embrace and adapt to changes in the industry. 

The goal of the academic program is to produce a lifelong learner who 
possesses a general knowledge of the many facets of communication while 
specializing in one or more areas within the field. Upon graduation, students 
will demonstrate mastery of the following learning outcomes: 

I. Identify important information relating to the history, laws and 
ethics of communication and the individuals responsible for shaping the 
industry. 
II. Explain and apply general theories and research methods used 
in communication. 
III. Demonstrate proficiency in oral communication in both small 
and large group settings. 
IV. Write clearly and correctly in a style appropriate for the audience and 
objective. 
V. Develop an understanding of and practice skills in current and 
emerging communication technologies that are relevant to the student’s 
area of interest. 
VI. Demonstrate accumulated knowledge within professional 
settings and situations. 
DEPARTMENT OFFERINGS 
Majors 

Communication 
Integrated Marketing Communication 

Minors 

Communication 
Web and Social Media Management 

Advanced Certificate 

Business & Professional Communication 

DEPARTMENT STANDARDS 

Communication Department majors are required to maintain a 3.0 GPA in 
major course work and earn a C or higher in all required courses. No major or 
minor course can be taken on a pass/fail basis. Students who fail to earn a 
grade of C or better in a required course must repeat the course. 

DEPARTMENT CORE COURSES 

Each student with a Communication Department major must complete the 
following courses. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Communication 73 Communication 

DEPARTMENT COURSE REQUIREMENTS 

COM 101 Communication in Society 3 credits 
COM 110 Oral Communication 3 credits 
ART 128 Graphic Design Basics 3 credits 
COM 260 Intro to Social Media 3 credits 
COM 310 Human Behavior & Persuasion 3 credits 
COM 473/475 Internship 0-3 credits 
COM 390 Professional Development 3 credits 
COM 430 Communication Management 3 credits 
or approved management course 
COM 490 Communication Capstone 3 credits 
MIS 150 Intro to Data Science 3 credits 
or approved elective 

INTERNSHIP 

Students majoring in communication or integrated marketing 
communication must complete an internship prior to graduation. For-credit 
and not-for-credit options exist, allowing students the maximum flexibility 
in completing the requirement. A minimum of 150 hours for the zero-credit 
option and 200 hours for the three-credit option must be completed to 
count toward graduation requirements. It is recommended that students 
complete more than one internship to be competitive in the marketplace. 
Students must register for the course prior to starting the internship to 
count toward the graduation requirement. 

ELECTIVES 
MAJOR ELECTIVES 

Students choose 15 credits in consultation with their advisor to demonstrate 
an area of specialty. Communication majors should choose courses with a 
COM prefix. Integrated marketing communication majors should choose 
from either COM or MKTG prefixes. A minor or double major outside the 
department may count toward this requirement. 

FREE ELECTIVES 

Students choose free electives that may or may not relate to the 
Communication Department or their major. If students choose to complete a 
three-credit internship, no credits in this category would be required, if a 
student chooses a zero-credit internship, three credits would be taken in this 
category. Credits for a minor in another area or double major can count 
toward this requirement. 

COMMUNICATION MAJOR 

Communication is interdisciplinary in nature as professionals are engaged in 
similar functions (gathering information and data, creating, disseminating 
and evaluating messages) and must be prepared with basic skills including 
writing, speaking and visual communication, along with the ability to 
develop a plan, organize, evaluate and think strategically. The 
communication program is designed to prepare students for entry to the 
communication industry in high-paying areas. Our students are part data 
analyst, part storyteller, and part multimedia specialist. To accomplish this, 
students are required to complete a core sequence that covers areas of 
interpersonal and intrapersonal communication, research and data analysis, 
skill development (technical and writing), and professional development. 
The core sequence cultivates an improved understanding of the role, 

practice, and analysis of communication in media, social and economic 
systems. The curriculum employs a “learn by doing” approach to expose 
students to the necessary knowledge and skills to enter a chosen career path 
and advance within their profession. In each of the courses in the 
curriculum, students are assigned projects that would be appropriate for 
inclusion in a professional portfolio. These projects are detailed on each 
major course syllabus. 

DEPARTMENTAL CORE 

COM 101 Communication in Society 3 credits 
COM 110 Oral Communication 3 credits 
ART 128 Graphic Design Basics 3 credits 
COM 260 Intro to Social Media 3 credits 
COM 310 Human Behavior & Persuasion 3 credits 
COM 473/475 Internship 0-3 credits 
COM 390 Professional Development 3 credits 
COM 430 Communication Management 3 credits 
or approved management course 
COM 490 Communication Capstone 3 credits 
MIS 150 Intro to Data Science 3 credits 
or approved elective 
MAJOR SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS 
COM 102 Interpersonal Communication 3 credits 
COM 150 Writing Fundamentals 3 credits 
COM 210 Mindful Communication 3 credits 
COM 240 Digital Video Production I 3 credits 
COM 211 Research and Analysis 3 credits 
ART 321 Introduction to Website Design 3 credits 
COM 352 Multimedia Writing 3 credits 
COM 440 Digital Storytelling 3 credits 

INTEGRATED MARKETING COMMUNICATION (IMC) MAJOR 

This interdisciplinary major is designed to prepare students for jobs in the 
modern marketing industry. Students in this major will take courses in the 
Business, Communication, Art, and, Mathematics and Computer Systems 
Departments. Increasingly, employers in the marketing field are looking for 
employees who have proficiency with graphic design software, web-based 
marketing, public relations strategies, advertising and branding, new and 
social media tools, and strategic marketing and communication campaigns. 
Students in this major will be exposed to all of these areas related to 
modern marketing strategies. The Integrated Marketing Communication 
major provides a qualitative focus for students with knowledge and an 
identifiable skill set in the broader, interdisciplinary, applied workings of a 
modern integrated marketing communication campaign. Students will also 
be required to take courses that cover content in foundational marketing 
theory and principles, as well as marketing research. The Integrated 
Marketing Communication curriculum prepares students, not only for 
employment in the modern marketing field, but also for continued study at 
the graduate level. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Communication 74 Communication 

DEPARTMENTAL CORE 

COM 101 Communication in Society 3 credits 
COM 110 Oral Communication 3 credits 
ART 128 Graphic Design Basics 3 credits 
COM 260 Intro to Social Media 3 credits 
COM 310 Human Behavior & Persuasion 3 credits 
COM 473/475 Internship 0-3 credits 
COM 390 Professional Development 3 credits 
COM 430 Communication Management 3 credits 
or approved management course 
COM 490 Communication Capstone 3 credits 
MIS 150 Intro to Data Science 3 credits 
or approved elective 
MAJOR SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS 
MKTG 162 Principles of Integrated Marketing 3 credits 
COM 321 Web & Social Media Strategies 3 credits 
MKTG 301 Consumer Behavior 3 credits 
ECON 106 Micro Economics 3 credits 
COM 321 Web & Social Media Analytics 3 credits 
MKTG 347 Advertising and Branding Strategies 3 credits 
MKTG 357 Marketing Research 3 credits 
MKTG 406 Marketing Management 3 credits 
COMMUNICATION MINOR 

A Communication minor complements a variety of majors and allows 
students to further refine their professional and creative skills. The minor 
includes six courses. (For non-majors only.) 

REQUIRED MINOR COURSES 

COM 110 Oral Communication 3 credits 
COM 101 Communication in Society 3 credits 
Choose one from each of the following three sections: 

SECTION I: Theory, Planning and Management 

COM 310 Human Behavior and Persuasion 3 credits 
COM 430 Communication Management 3 credits 
COM 210 Mindful Communication 3 credits 
Other approved course 3 credits 

SECTION II: Syndication Skills 

COM 260 Introduction to Social Media 3 credits 
COM 352 Multimedia Writing 3 credits 
COM 440 Digital Storytelling 3 credits 
Other approved skills course 3 credits 

SECTION III: Professional Skills 

COM 390 Professional Development 3 credits 
COM 473/475 Internship 0-3 credits* 

*if zero option is selected, another COM course needs to be 
selected as well 
Other approved course 3 credits 
One elective from the COM prefix or approved elective 

SOCIAL MEDIA AND WEB MINOR 

The Social Media and Web minor couples with a student’s chosen major to 
harness the power of convergence in a network of related coursework and 
skills by training students in the professional use of emerging technologies 
and web-based communication. Combined with their major field of study, 
the Social Media and Web Minor prepares students to be skilled 
practitioners in the new media landscape. The courses enable students to 
participate in the virtual forum, cyberspace, using proper protocols informed 
by communication theory and to adapt as protocols change. 

REQUIRED MINOR COURSES 

ART 128 Graphic Design Basics 3 credits 
ART 321 Introduction to Website Design 3 credits 
COM 240 Digital Video Production I 3 credits 
COM 260 Intro to Social Media 3 credits 
COM 321 Web & Social Media Analytics 3 credits 
COM 230 Web & Social Media Strategies 3 credits 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Criminology & Criminal Justice 
75 Criminology & Criminal Justice 

Criminology & Criminal Justice 

DEPARTMENT CHAIR 

Maria L. Garase, Ph.D. 

FACULTY 

Associate Professors: 

Tina M. Fryling, M.S., J.D. 
Maria L. Garase, Ph.D. 


Assistant Professors: 

Spyridon Kodellas, Ph.D. 
EmmaLeigh Kirchner, Ph.D. 


Adjunct Faculty: 

Mark Amendola, M.S.S.A., LSW 
Robert Blakely, M.S. 
Sgt. Dennis Donovan, PSP, Ret. 
Patricia Lightner, M.S. 
James Pitonyak, J.D 
Adam Saeler, Ph.D. 


Faculty Emeritus: 

Peter J. Benekos, Ph.D. 

Frank E. Hagan, Ph.D. 

VISION 

The vision of the Department of Criminology and Criminal Justice is to 
provide students with a liberal arts background that will enable them to live 
rich and fulfilling lives, with the capability of personal responsibility, 
professional development and civic responsibility. 

MISSION 

The Department of Criminology and Criminal Justice is dedicated to 
developing critical thinking, diversity appreciation, civic responsibility, 
leadership and social justice in our undergraduate and graduate students. 
We prepare students for careers in the helping professions, for leadership in 
criminal justice and community affairs, and for the pursuit of advanced 
degrees. Engaging students in sustained and civil conversations about the 
relationship between individual and community well-being is both an 
objective and a means for realizing other objectives. 

GOALS AND OBJECTIVES 

The goals and objectives of the program are to provide students with a basic 
knowledge of the operation of the Criminal Justice System, including the 
necessary historical background, the legal aspects and ramifications, the 
sociological factors and issues, and the basic principles and skills needed for 
an entry-level career position. 

DEPARTMENTAL GOALS 

Students will gain an understanding of the history and current state of 
affairs in criminology and criminal justice. 

Students will be able to critically analyze methodologies and theories based 
in their discipline. 

Students will gain proficiency in oral, written, and electronic communication 
skills. 

Students will make an active commitment to justice, prudence, civility, and 
appreciation for diversity. 

Students will score higher than the national average on the Major Field Test 
for Criminal Justice. 

Students will demonstrate ethical leadership in the criminal justice and 
social services professions. 

STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 

• 
Demonstrate knowledge of the historical context of the Criminal 
Justice System and profession. 
• 
Demonstrate synthesis, problem solving, and critical thinking 
skills. 
• 
Demonstrate basic knowledge of legal aspects of criminal justice 
operations. 
• 
Synthesize and apply basic knowledge of sociological issues 
affecting criminal justice. 
• 
Demonstrate an understanding of methodological concepts for 
conducting and analyzing research. 
• 
Demonstrate and apply knowledge of professional skills for 
criminal justice. 
CRIMINAL JUSTICE MAJOR (BACHELOR OF ARTS) 

The Criminal Justice Department offers major concentrations in Law 
Enforcement, Corrections, Juvenile Justice, and Pre-Law. A minor 
concentration is available to non-majors in all four areas. 

Students who intend to graduate with a Bachelor of Arts Degree in Criminal 
Justice with a concentration in Law Enforcement, Corrections, Juvenile 
Justice or Pre-Law must meet the regular degree requirements of the 
university as well as the requirements of the Criminology & Criminal Justice 
Department. A Criminal Justice major who wants to select two 
concentrations must complete all Criminal Justice core courses PLUS five 
separate courses for each concentration. 

To fulfill degree Bachelor of Arts degree requirements, students must 
complete 121 credits to graduate. These credits include: 45 credits in 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Criminology & Criminal Justice 
76 Criminology & Criminal Justice 

required Criminal Justice major courses: 40 credits in the core; and 36 
credits of general electives. Students are encouraged to pursue minors 
and/or double majors in related disciplines. 

B.A. & M.S. Criminal Justice and Criminal Justice Administration Degrees 
4+1 Accelerated Program 
The Department of Criminology & Criminal Justice offers a five-year 
bachelor’s + master’s degrees program: instead of completing the 
undergraduate degree in 4 years and then needing an additional 2 years to 
earn a graduate degree, students can earn the Bachelor of Arts in Criminal 
Justice in 4 years and then complete the Master’s Degree in the Criminal 
Justice Administration in just one (1) year. This program is designed to 
enhance career credentials and opportunities with a more affordable cost for 
an advanced degree. 

Eligibility: Complete 5 undergraduate criminal justice courses with a 
minimum of a 3.2 GPA in Criminal Justice and 3.0 GPA overall. 

1. 
Apply to the director of the CJA graduate program for the 4+1 
program by March 1 of sophomore year. 
2. 
If accepted, students will be enrolled as a Graduate Non Degree 
student and will begin fall semester of junior year taking one 
CJA graduate course per semester. Students will have two 
transcripts: undergraduate and graduate non degree. 
3. 
Students will need to maintain 3.0 GPA in the 4 designated 
graduate courses; only one C permitted. Students will also need 
to maintain 3.2 GPA in undergraduate Criminal Justice courses 
and 3.0 GPA overall. 
4. 
The 4 graduate courses taken in junior and senior years will be 
used to waive corresponding undergraduate criminal justice 
course requirements (see below). 
a. 
Students will still be required to meet the 121-credit 
minimum to earn the B.A. degree. This provides 
students the opportunity to take additional criminal 
justice electives or apply coursework to a minor. 
b. 
Students will register for a MINIMUM of 12 
undergraduate credits each semester during their 
junior and senior year in addition to the graduate 
course registration. This will insure that flat rate 
billing will stay in place and graduate courses will be 
included in the bill. 
5. 
By March 1 of the senior year, students will apply to the 
Graduate School for admission to the CJA graduate program. If 
admitted, the 12 graduate non-degree credits will be applied as 
graduate credits toward the Master’s Degree. 
6. 
At the end of the senior year, students will graduate with a B.A. 
in Criminal Justice and will have earned 12 graduate credits. In 
the 5th year, students will complete 18 graduate credits at the 
graduate tuition rate and graduate with the Master of Science in 
the Criminal Justice Administration. 
7. 
Thesis is an option with the master’s degree and begins in the 
senior year with the thesis proposal, which is then completed in 
the fifth year. Graduate internships are also an option. 
Undergraduate 
CRJS 343 Criminal Justice Ethics 3 credits 
CRJS 230 Criminology 3 credits 
CRJS Elective 3 credits 
CRJS Elective 3 credits 
Graduate 
CJA 506 Professional Ethics 3 credits 
CJA 621 Advanced Criminology 3 credits 
CJA Elective 3 credits 
CJA Elective 3 credits 

Duquesne University School of Law 3/3 Early Admissions Programs 

The only circumstance in which candidates may apply for admission without 
a baccalaureate degree is through a pre-arranged 3/3 Early Admissions 
Agreement between Mercyhurst University and the Duquesne University 
Law School. Mercyhurst University cooperates with the School of Law in 
programs that enable students to receive a bachelor’s degree after three 
years of undergraduate work and successful completion of the first year of 
law school. The Law School has partners with several other universities as 
well. lawadmissions@duq.edu 

Eligibility Requirements 

Eligibility for the early admission programs generally require a minimum 
cumulative grade point average of 3.5 over three years (minimum 90 
credits); completion of all undergraduate curricular requirements (no 
transfer credits are allowed); a minimum LSAT score in at least the 60th 
percentile (students interested in applying should take the LSAT in the fall or 
winter of their junior year); a letter of recommendation from the pre-law 
advisor to the Law School’s Office of Admissions; and a personal interview 
with the Admissions Committee. Detailed requirements for each 3/3 
Agreement should be directed to the Law School's Office of Admissions. 

REQUIREMENTS FOR CRIMINAL JUSTICE MAJORS 

Students are not Criminal Justice majors simply because they are enrolled in 
Criminal Justice courses. Students who enroll as Criminal Justice majors 
must meet and maintain university and department academic 
requirements. This requires a minimum overall GPA of 2.0 and a Criminal 
Justice GPA of 2.5. In addition, students must also demonstrate character 
and conduct which are consistent with professional standards for careers in 
Criminal Justice. 

Student progress and academic achievement are monitored and evaluated 
by the department each semester. The faculty may also request a meeting 
with students to review academic progress. Students who fail to meet or 
maintain the GPA requirements or the appropriate conduct standards will be 
subject to probationary status or removal from the Criminal Justice major. 
Students who are dismissed from Criminal Justice will be placed on Non-
Major status and referred to an academic counselor to consider academic 
alternatives, including repeating Criminal Justice courses and petitioning 
the department for readmission 
to the major. Students with Non-Major 
status who take Criminal Justice courses will not be eligible to graduate in 
Criminal Justice. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Criminology & Criminal Justice 77 Criminology & Criminal Justice 

A three-credit internship can be completed in the junior or senior year in 
Law Enforcement, Corrections, Juvenile Justice or Pre-Law. These programs 
are reserved for students who achieve a minimum of 2.5 GPA in major 
required courses. 

The opportunity for an internship will depend on the availability of 
internships and the approval of the staff. 

Students who wish to graduate from the Criminal Justice Department must: 

1. Maintain a general academic average of at least 2.0. 
2. Demonstrate desirable physical, mental, emotional, and social traits for 
entry into the Criminal Justice professions. 
3. Complete 45 credits of Major Course Requirements. 
4. Criminal Justice majors must maintain a minimum 2.5 GPA in the criminal 
justice major and concentration courses. Criminal Justice minors must 
maintain a 2.5 in the criminal justice courses. 
POLICY ON PLAGIARISM 

The Criminal Justice Department prohibits plagiarism in any form, including 
directly copying large or small portions of either printed works or written 
papers of another student. Paraphrasing, or changing an author’s ideas or 
words, is also a form of plagiarism if the source of the idea being 
paraphrased is not acknowledged. Violations of this policy are treated 
seriously. A first offense will result in failure of the course; any subsequent 
offenses will result in expulsion from the criminal justice major. The 
department also subscribes to the Academic Dishonesty Policy set forth by 
the Office of Academic Affairs. 

MAJOR FIELD TEST 

In order to assess the learning outcomes of criminal justice majors, all 
criminal justice majors must take the standardized Criminal Justice Major 
Field Test during their senior year as a requirement for graduation. Students 
who do not complete the test will not receive their diploma. 

REQUIREMENTS FOR CRIMINAL JUSTICE MAJORS 

All Criminal Justice majors are required to successfully complete the 
following courses in partial fulfillment of the Bachelor of Arts Degree: 

CRJS 101 Justice in America 3 credits 
CRJS 104 Introduction to Corrections 3 credits 
CRJS/SOC 205 Introduction to Juvenile Justice 3 credits 
and Delinquency 
CRJS 207 Police Functions 3 credits 
CRJS/SOC 230 Criminology 3 credits 
CRJS 310 Constitutional Law in Criminal 3 credits 
Procedure 
CRJS 318 Introduction to Criminal Justice 3 credits 
Research 
CRJS 343 Criminal Justice Ethics 3 credits 
CRJS 410 Criminal Justice Senior Seminar 3 credits 

In addition to the Criminal Justice core courses required of all majors, a 
student must specialize in one of the following concentrations: 

LAW ENFORCEMENT (four-year degree) 

CRJS 208 Criminal Investigation 3 credits 
CRJS 309 Contemporary Police Problems 3 credits 
CRJS 326 Police Administration 3 credits 
CRJS 475 Law Enforcement Internship or approved 3 credits 
substitution 
Two (2) Criminal Justice Electives 6 credits 

Students may take an approved Criminal Justice elective (3 credits) in lieu of 
the Internship. 

CORRECTIONS (four-year degree) 

CRJS 222 Human Behavior in Corrections 3 credits 
CRJS 328 Corrections Administration 3 credits 
CRJS 344 Corrections Counseling 3 credits 
CRJS 475 Corrections Internship or approved 3 credits 

substitution 
Criminal Justice Electives 6 credits 
Students may take an approved Criminal Justice elective (3 credits) in lieu of 
the Internship. 

JUVENILE JUSTICE (four-year degree) 

CRJS 280 The Juvenile Justice System 3 credits 
CRJS 285 Approaches to Juvenile Delinquency 3 credits 
CRJS 317 Professional Practice in Juvenile Justice 3 credits 
CRJS 475 Juvenile Justice Internship or approved 3 credits 

substitution 
Criminal Justice Electives 6 credits 
Students may take an approved Criminal Justice elective (3 credits) in lieu of 
the Internship. 

PRE-LAW (four-year degree) 

CRJS/POLI 322 Legal Research and Writing 3 credits 
CRJS 337 Sociology of Law 3 credits 
CRJS 245/ PSYC Psychology and the Law 3 credits 
240 
CRJS 475 Pre-Law Internship or approved 3 credits 

substitute* 
Criminal Justice Electives 6 credits 
*Approved electives in lieu of Pre-Law Internship include: POLI 421 
(Constitutional Law); POLI 422 (Civil Liberties); POLI 225 (American Legal 
Process): BADM 310 (Business Law I); POLI 321 (Environmental Law) 

Students cannot receive both a Pre-Law Concentration and a Pre-Law Minor 
as there are too many duplicated courses. 
A student who desires to substitute a course for any required course for the 
major or concentration must submit a letter explaining his/her reason for 
substitution to the chair of the department. A faculty committee will then 
determine the acceptability of any required substitution. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Criminology & Criminal Justice 78 Criminology & Criminal Justice 

DOUBLE MAJOR: SOCIOLOGY 

Some Criminal Justice courses are cross-listed with other majors that make it 
convenient to double major in a related field such as Sociology. In addition 
to the required Criminal Justice major courses, the Sociology double major 
requires eight (8) distinct Sociology courses including the following required 
courses: 

SOC 100 Introduction to Sociology 3 credits 
SOC 101 Contemporary Social Problems 3 credits 
SOC 300 Sociological Research Methods 3 credits 
SOC 301 Contemporary Sociological Theory 3 credits 
STAT 130 Statistics in Social Science 3 credits 
SOC 490 Senior Project 3 credits 

Four Electives (including Criminal Justice cross listed courses) 

INTERDISCIPLINARY MINOR PSYCHOLOGY OF CRIME AND JUSTICE 

The Departments of Psychology and Criminal Justice have developed a 
sequence of study to provide students with an interdisciplinary focus in the 
psychology of crime and justice. The minor is designed to complement 
undergraduate degrees in psychology, criminal justice, and other social and 
behavioral sciences. 

In addition to the course requirements for a Criminal Justice degree, 
Criminal Justice majors who seek to qualify for the interdisciplinary minor in 
the Psychology of Crime and Justice must complete these additional courses 
and maintain a 2.5 GPA: 

PSYC 101 Introduction to Psychology 3 credits 
PSYC 201 Personality 3 credits 
PSYC 211 Abnormal Psychology 3 credits 
PSYC 231 Social Psychology 3 credits 
PSYC/CRJS 350 Antecedents of Aggression 3 credits 
CRJS 245/ Psychology and the Law 3 credits 
PSYC 240 
PSYC 253 Drugs & Human Behavior 3 credits 

Non-majors who desire to declare a minor in one of the Criminal Justice 
concentrations are required to complete the following courses: 

LAW ENFORCEMENT MINOR 

CRJS 101 Justice in America 3 credits 
CRJS 207 Police Functions 3 credits 
CRJS 208 Criminal Investigation 3 credits 
CRJS/SOC 230 Criminology 3 credits 
CRJS 309 Contemporary Police Problems 3 credits 
CRJS 310 Constitutional Law in Criminal 3 credits 

Procedure 
CRJS 326 Police Administration 3 credits 
Internship or approved Criminal Justice substitute 3 credits 

CORRECTIONS MINOR 

CRJS 101 Justice in America 3 credits 
CRJS 104 Introduction to Corrections 3 credits 
CRJS 222 Human Behavior in Corrections 3 credits 
CRJS/SOC 230 Criminology 3 credits 
CRJS 310 Constitutional Law in Criminal 3 credits 

Procedure 
CRJS 328 Corrections Administration 3 credits 
CRJS 344 Corrections Counseling 3 credits 
Internship or approved Criminal Justice substitute. 3 credits 

JUVENILE JUSTICE MINOR 

CRJS 101 Justice in America 3 credits 
CRJS/ SOC Introduction to Juvenile Justice and 3 credits 
205 Delinquency 
CRJS/SOC Criminology 3 credits 
230 
CRJS 280 The Juvenile Justice System 3 credits 
CRJS 285 Approaches to Juvenile Delinquency 3 credits 
CRJS 310 Constitutional Law in Criminal Proc 3 credits 
CRJS 317 Prof. Practice in Juvenile Justice 3 credits 
Internship or approved Criminal Justice substitute. 3 credits 

PRE LAW MINOR 

CRJS 101 Justice in America 3 credits 
CRJS 310 Constitutional Law in Criminal Proc 3 credits 
CRJS/POLI Legal Research and Writing 3 credits 
322 
CRJS/SOC Sociology of Law 3 credits 
337 
CRJS 343 Criminal Justice Ethics 3 credits 
CRJS 245/ Psychology and the Law 3 credits 
PSYC 240 
Approved Criminal Justice Electives or Pre-Law Internship 6 credits 

GRADUATE PROGRAM 

Mercyhurst University also offers a Graduate Program of study leading to the 
Master of Science Degree in Criminal Justice Administration. (See Graduate 
Catalog.) 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Dance 79 Dance 

Dance 

DEPARTMENT CHAIR 

Tauna Hunter, MFA 

FACULTY 

Professor: 

Tauna Hunter, MFA 

Associate Professors: 

C. Noelle Partusch, MFA 
Solveig Santillano, M.A., MFA 
Assistant Professor: 

Mark Santillano, M.A. 

Adjunct Faculty: 

Michael S. Gleason, B.A. 
Lesley Bories-Scalise 


STAFF 


Physical Therapist: 

Elizabeth Darling MPT, ATC/L 

Music Director/Principal Pianist: 

Richard DiFiore 

Technical Director: 

Andrew Ferguson 

Administrative Assistant: 

Danielle Kaiser 

INTRODUCTION 

Accredited by the National Association of Schools of Dance 

VISION 

The Dance Department’s vision is to proliferate the art of dance in the 21st 
century. 

MISSION STATEMENT 

The Dance Department’s mission is to generate leadership for the dance 
field, through rigorous B.A. and BFA programs emphasizing the 
development of professional dancers, teachers, choreographers and scholars 
through cognitive, affective, and psychomotor taxonomies. 

PROGRAM GOALS 

To cultivate empowerment through vigorous involvement in a progressive 
curriculum grounded in classical and contemporary ballet supported by 
diverse dance disciplines, theoretical and somatic studies. 

To prepare confident artists who recognize and apply the transferable 
learning and knowledge embedded in dance to coalesce with developed 
critical thinking, writing and oral expertise as support to all of their life 
choices. 

To generate creative leaders who pay tribute to the past, strive for the 
highest standards of excellence and proactively collaborate to celebrate and 
serve their communities whilst moving the dance field forward. 

To nurture compassionate and balanced human beings who hold sacred the 
honor of body, mind and spirit for themselves and others. 

PROGRAM STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 

Demonstrate a high level of technical mastery in ballet and/or other dance 
disciplines(s) 

Identify a significant body of theoretical and historical knowledge 
pertaining to the dance field 

Produce and present work by confronting professional problems through 
analysis, experimentation & development of coherent goals evident in 
scholarly & creative presentations 

Recognize and assess positive approaches to mental & physical health, 
professional theatrical aesthetic and an injury-free work ethic 

PORTFOLIO REVIEW AND SUBSEQUENT ANNUAL REVIEWS 

All dance majors are required to participate in a four-year Portfolio Review. 
Portfolios outlining dance progress, academic scholarship and service are 
submitted to the dance faculty in the spring of each year. Guidelines are 
outlined in the Student Handbook. In the sophomore year the dance faculty 
conducts a formal review to determine if the student should continue as a 
dance major. Majors are expected to maintain a 3.0 GPA in all dance courses 
and an overall GPA of 2.5. Majors are evaluated in terms of their grades and 
overall performance including their ability to sustain an injury free work 
ethic and establish a professional approach to a theatrical aesthetic that 
includes maintaining a positive approach to mental and physical wellness 
and health. Their attendance record, potential for promotion and successful 
completion of all requirements including service to the dance department 
and community are also considered. 

STUDENT HANDBOOK POLICIES AND PROCEDURES 

Every dance major is provided with a Student Handbook, which outlines the 
policies and procedures for the Dance Department. Guidelines for the four-
year Portfolio Review and a recommended degree plan are also included. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Dance 80 Dance 
ADMISSION DEGREE REQUIREMENTS FOR B.A. IN DANCE 
Admission to the Mercyhurst University Dance Department is based on the Recommended sequencing with a total of 121 credits to graduate. 

following requirements: 

• Complete a university application and supplemental dance application 
with photo in first arabesque (ladies on pointe). 
• Arrange for an audition, send a DVD or post on YouTube. 
• Send an official secondary school transcript (and official college transcripts 
if a transfer student). 
FINANCIAL INFORMATION -SCHOLARSHIP 

Dance merit scholarships are awarded at the discretion of the dance faculty 
and the dance chair. Any prospective student is eligible to compete for 
scholarship assistance, regardless of financial status. Students wishing to 
apply for financial assistance must apply to the director of financial aid. 
Students on scholarship are expected to maintain a 3.0 GPA in all dance 
courses, an overall GPA of 2.5 and abide by the policies and procedures 
outlined in the Dance Department Student Handbook. Service learning is 
required of all dance majors on scholarship. At the end of each academic 
year, there is an evaluation that serves as a review for maintaining 
scholarship status. Students who fail to maintain academic and performance 
levels may forfeit their dance scholarship and/or be advised into a Liberal 
Studies major. 

ATTENDANCE 

Dance students are expected to attend all classes and rehearsals and are 
held responsible for any work missed because of tardiness or absence. 
Absences may be made up according to the policies and procedures of the 
student handbook. Attendance is of major importance if a student is to 
make progress and/or retain a dance scholarship. 

PHYSICAL THERAPY AND INJURY PREVENTION 

The on-campus Athletic Training Center provides diagnostic and physical 
therapy assistance throughout the academic year. Physical therapist 
Elizabeth Darling, DPT, OCS, CLT, ATC, screens students for injuries and 
provides physical therapy throughout the year. 

B.A. AND BFA DEGREE REQUIREMENTS FOR FOUNDATION YEAR 
Required sequencing for freshman year 

DANC 105 Dance Essentials 1 credit 
DANC 110 Dance History 3 credits 
DANC 106 Music for Dancers 3 credits 
DANC 121/122 Ballet & Pointe Technique 6 credits 
DANC 151 Modern I 2 credits 
DANC 161 Jazz I 2 credits 
DANC 150 Dance Conditioning 1 credit 
DANC 191 Company Ensemble 1 credits 
DANC190 Production Practicum 1 credit 
iMU courses 2 credits 
REACH Curriculum/Electives 14 credits 

Sophomore Year 
DANC 210 Kinesiology 3 credits 
DANC 280 Choreography I 3 credits 
DANC 221/222 Ballet & Pointe Technique 6 credits 
DANC 251 Modern II 2 credits 
DANC 261 Jazz II 2 credits 
DANC 291 Company Ensemble 2 credits 
BIO 240 Anatomy & Physiology 3 credits 
BIO 241 Anatomy & Physiology Lab 1 credit 
REACH Curriculum/Electives 12 credits 

Junior Year 
DANC 310 Pedagogy 3 credits 
DANC 321/322 Ballet & Pointe Technique 6 credits 
DANC 351 Modern III 2 credits 

REACH Curriculum/Electives 25 credits 

Senior Year 
DANC 421/422 Ballet & Pointe Technique 6 credits 
DANC 485 Senior Pro-Seminar 1 credit 

REACH Curriculum/Electives 29 credits 

B.A. Dance Electives 
DANC 451 Modern IV 2 credits 
DANC 171 Tap 1 credit 
DANC 301 Musical Theatre Dance 1 credit 
DANC 421/422 Pointe & Variations 1 credit 
DANC 138-438 Pas de Deux 1 credit 
DAN 141-441C Men’s technique & Variations 1 credit 
DAN 200C Intro. to Arts Administration 3 credits 
DANC 180 Introduction to Labanotation 3 credits 
DANC 380 Choreography II 3 credits 
DANC480 Choreography III 3 credits 
DANC 391-491 Company Ensemble 1 credit 
DAN 194-494C Company Ensemble Elective 0 credits 
DANC 285 Summer Dance Experience 3 credits 
DANC 385 Abroad Experience 3 credits 
DANC 475 An Approved Internship 3 credits 
REQUIREMENTS FOR B.A. IN DANCE WITH CONCENTRATION IN 
PEDAGOGY 

Formal application is required after completing Choreography I and 
Pedagogy I. 12 additional credits are required as follows for a total of 77 
credits for a B.A. in Dance with a Concentration in Pedagogy 

DANC 380 Choreography II 3 credits 
DANC 475 Internship 3 credits 
DANC 491/492 Company Ensemble ( additional 6 credits 

terms ) 

One of the following electives: 
Dance techniques(In addition to required section) 1-3 credits 


2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Dance 81 Dance 
Introduction to Labanotation 3 credits ACCELERATED THREE-YEAR TRACK BFA 
Intro. to Arts Administration 3 credits 36 credits annually and 20 credits over three summers 
ACCELERATED THREE-YEAR TRACK B.A. REQUIREMENTS FOR ARTS ADMINISTRATION MINOR 
36 credits annually and 13 credits over two summers DANC 200 Intro. to Arts Administration 3 credits 
ECON 105 Macroeconomics 3 credits 
REQUIREMENTS FOR BFA IN DANCE MGMT 120 Principles of Management * 3 credits 
Recommended sequencing with a total of 121 credits to graduate. * Pre-Req. STAT 109 Statistics 
MKTG 162 Principles of Integrated Marketing 3 credits 
Sophomore Year COM 261 Principles of Public Relations 3 credits 
DANC 210 Kinesiology 3 credits MKTG 347 Advertising and Branding Strategies 3 credits 
DANC 280 Choreography I 3 credits ACCT 140 Computerized Accounting 3 credits 
DANC 221/222 Ballet & Pointe Technique 6 credits DANC 475 Arts Administration Internship 3 credits 
DANC 251 Modern II 2 credits 
DANC 261 Jazz II 2 credits 
DANC 292 Company Ensemble 2 credits 
BIO 240 Anatomy & Physiology 3 credits 
BIO 241 Anatomy & Physiology Lab 1 credit 
REACH Curriculum/Electives 14 credits 
Junior Year 
DANC 310 Pedagogy I 3 credits 
DANC 380 Choreography II 3 credits 
DANC480 Choreography III 3 credits 
DANC321/322 Ballet & Pointe Technique 6 credits 
DANC 351 Modern III 2 credits 
DANC 171 or 301 Tap or Musical Theatre Dance 1 credit 
DANC 392 Company Ensemble 2 credits 
REACH Curriculum/Electives 22 credits 
Senior Year 
DANC 421/422 Ballet & Pointe Technique 6 credits 
DANC 451 Modern IV 2 credits 
DANC 485 Senior Pro-Seminar 1 credit 
DANC 405 Senior Seminar (Choreo. IV) 3 credits 
DANC 492 Company Ensemble 1 credit 
REACH Curriculum/Electives 25 credits 
BFA Optional Dance Electives 
DAN 171C Tap 1 credit 
DANC 301 Musical Theatre Dance 1 credit 
DANC 121/122 Pointe & Variations 1 credit 
DANC 138/-438 Pas de Deux 1 credit 
DANC 141-441 Men’s technique & Variations 1 credit 
DANC 200 Intro. to Arts Administration 3 credits 
DANC 180 Introduction to Labanotation 3 credits 
DANC 192-492 Company Ensemble 1 credit 
DANC 194-494 Company Ensemble Elective 0 credits 
DANC 285 Summer Dance Experience 3 credits 
DANC 385 Study Abroad Experience 3 credits 
DANC 475 An Approved Internship 3 credits 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Education 
82 Education 

Education 

DEPARTMENT CHAIR 

Susan D. Johnson, Assistant Professor Special Education 

FACULTY 

Professor Emeritus: 

Kathleen Bukowski, Ph.D. 

Professor: 

Phillip J. Belfiore, Ph.D. 

Associate Professors: 

Timothy Frawley, D.Ed. 

Assistant Professors: 

Sarah Howorth, Ph.D., B.C.B.A.; Susan D. Johnson, A.B.D.; Thomas 
Kitchen, M.S., BCBA 


Director of Field Placements: 

Alan Karns, M.Ed. 

Assistant Director of Field Placements: 

Gleck Williams, M.Ed. 

MISSION STATEMENT 

The mission of the Department of Education at Mercyhurst University is to 
develop teachers who are intellectually and spiritually sensitive, 
professionally and socially responsible, namely those who seek to bring 
out these same qualities in their own students. To accomplish this 
mission, our teacher preparation program enables pre-service teachers to 
facilitate growth in intellectual curiosity, self-confidence, knowledge, 
responsibility, and interpersonal relationships. 

PROGRAM STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 

The Education Department Early Childhood/Special Education faculty has 
developed six broad-based learning outcomes that serve as the framework 
for the program’s curriculum. 

Upon completion of the pre-service teacher preparation program, graduates 
will be able to: 

• 
Create and facilitate a quality lesson plan. 
• 
Articulate a personal teaching philosophy statement. 
• 
Assess Pre-4 Early Childhood and Pre-8 Special Education 
student performance. 
• 
Demonstrate personal ethical and professional standards in a 
school setting. 
• 
Plan for and implement differentiated instruction for students 
with special needs in a PreK-4 Early Childhood and PreK-8 
Special Education. 

• 
Demonstrate knowledge of best practices associated with child 
development, teaching and learning in a PreK-4 Early Childhood 
and PreK-8 population. 
CERTIFICATION PROGRAMS 

Undergraduate degrees leading to teacher certification from the 
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania are available in the following areas: Art 
Education K-12;; Early Childhood Education PreK-4; Early Childhood 
Education PreK-4/Special Education PreK-8; World Language Education. 

K-12 (French, Spanish), and Music Education K-12, Secondary (7-12) Social 
Studies and Secondary (7-12) English. 

The graduate program in Secondary Education will lead to certification in 
the following areas; Biology Education 7-12, Chemistry Education 7-12, 
Earth/Space Science Education 7-12, English Education 7-12, Math 
Education 7-12, and Social Studies Education 7-12. 

The graduate program in Special Education will lead to certification in 
Special Education (see Graduate Catalog for further details). 

An Education major is expected to maintain a GPA of 3.0, but may seek 
certification and achieve the conferral of a bachelor’s degree with a GPA of 
2.8-2.99 if the qualifying PAPA or Core and/or Praxis II or PECT score is met. 

ACCREDITATION 

All certification programs have full accreditation endorsements by the 
Pennsylvania Department of Education. The State Board of Education 
adopted changes that affect all of PA’s teacher certification programs by 
adding 9 credits or 270 hours or equivalent combination for adaptations and 
accommodations for diverse students in an inclusive setting and 3 credits or 
90 hours or equivalent combination to meet the instructional needs of 
English Language Learners. New regulations for certifying teachers became 
effective on January 1, 2013. 

MINOR 

The Education Department offers a minor in Special Education PreK-8. 

CONCENTRATION 

The Education Department offers a concentration in Applied Behavior 
Analysis. 

ADMISSION 

All students intending to complete a bachelor’s degree in Education must 
make formal application 
for admission to the Education Department 
during the spring semester of their sophomore year, upon completion of 48 
credits of university level study. Those students earning teacher certification 
in Secondary Education 7-12 or K-12 Education must make formal 
application in the specific academic department in their area of study. 
Transfer students must complete one Mercyhurst Education course prior to 
applying for admission. All students must meet the published admissions 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Education 83 Education 

criteria. Admission to an Education program constitutes admission to the 
Education Department. Dismissal from an Education program constitutes 
dismissal from the Education Department. Mercyhurst University complies 
with the Pennsylvania Department of Education regulations for teacher 
certification. Should these regulations change, Mercyhurst will change 
requirements accordingly and students will be responsible for meeting the 
new guidelines for program completion and certification. 

PROCEDURES FOR ADMISSION REVIEW 

1. Minimum requirements for admission to the Education Program are: 
GPA of 3.0 
Completion of 6 university credits in Mathematics 
Completion of 6 university credits in English (3 credits in writing and 3 
credits in literature) 
Completion of 48 credit semester hours 
As of Aug. 1, 2015 (as per House Bill 1816/Act 168) all students must meet 
the Basic Skills Testing Requirements as outlined by the Pennsylvania 
Department of Education. 
2. Students eligible for admission to the Education Program have their 
applications examined as follows: 
Minimum GPA of 3.0 or alternative is required for admission to the program. 
Students who meet the standards for admission present their portfolios to 
their advisors. If portfolios are complete, students are unconditionally 
accepted into the program. 
RETENTION 

Students placed on any kind of probationary status by the 
admission/retention committees of the Early Childhood Education, 
Secondary, or Special Education Departments may not enroll in any 
Education Department courses unless specifically approved by the chair of 
the Education Department. A student receiving a final evaluation of 
unsatisfactory in any course clinical experience may not enroll in any other 
Education Department course until the department faculty agree to permit 
the student to repeat the clinical experience and such is completed at a 
satisfactory level by the student. A student may be dismissed from the 
Education Department should he/she receive, at the conclusion of either 
the first or second half of the Capstone Clinical assignment, an evaluation of 
unsatisfactory. The final determination of unsatisfactory performance in the 
Capstone Clinical program is made by the university supervisor, the director 
of field placements and the chair of the Education Department. 

MANDATED GRADING SCALE 

The faculty in the Education Department uses a unified grading scale in the 
assessment of student achievement in all education courses. Above average 
grades will be reserved for “exemplary” work only. 

100-95% (A) 94-90% (B+) 89-85% (B) 84-78% (C+) 
77-70% (C) 69-65% (D+) 64-60% (D) Below 60% (F) 

CLINICAL EXPERIENCES 

All students will complete the Capstone Clinical, a vital experience in the 
program of the emerging professional educator. As part of the Capstone 
Clinical experience, each student will present an accepted professional 
portfolio. Capstone Clinical assignments/placements are the responsibility of 

the university. To avoid conflicts of interest, a candidate will normally not be 
assigned to districts from which he/she graduated or to districts in which 
he/she permanently resides or to schools in which an immediate family 
member is employed. 

Most course offerings of the Education Department require that a student 
successfully complete an assigned clinical experience in order to pass the 
academic course. Students who register for courses with a clinical 
experience are required by PA state law to obtain ACT 24/82, ACT 34, ACT 
114 and ACT 151 clearances, a clear TB test and the Mandatory Reporter 
Training Course. Copies of these clearances must be presented to the course 
instructor during the first week of class and submitted to the Education 
Office. Information on obtaining these clearances can be found in the 
Education Office or on the Pennsylvania Department of Education website 
(http://www.teaching.state.pa.us) 

Effective Dec. 31, 2014, employees who have direct contact with children 
will be required to obtain new clearances every 36 months. 

The nature of a course (location, number of hours, types of assignments, 
number of visits, student responsibility, etc.) is determined by the specific 
subject matter and content of the academic course. Specific information 
concerning a course clinical is found in the course syllabus. An unexcused 
absence from an assigned course clinical and/or an unsatisfactory final 
clinical evaluation from either the course instructor or the classroom clinical 
supervisor will result in a grade of “F” for the course and the student being 
given notice of automatic placement on final probationary status within the 
specific department and the Education Department. 

CAPSTONE CLINICAL 

Students accepted in the Education Department must make formal 
application for Capstone Clinical assignments at least one year prior to the 
semester in which they expect to do the Capstone Clinical experience. All 
assignments will be for a 14-week period. Capstone Clinical is done during 
the fall semester or the spring semester. 

EDEC 475. Early Childhood Education PreK-4 
ECSP 475. Early Childhood Education PreK-4/ Special Education PreK-8 
EDUC 475. Secondary Education (Art/Music/World Languages) 

After the application has been received and approved, each student 
accepted will be granted a conditional Capstone Clinical assignment. All 
Capstone Clinical assignments are conditional upon the academic results of 
the previous semester. Students accepted into the Capstone Clinical 
program must follow the rules and regulations governing 
admission/retention in this program. Final approval for Capstone Clinical 
will be sent to students who have: 

a. Maintained a minimum GPA overall average as documented in 
their Admission Review Process. 
b. Unconditional admittance status. 
c. Removal of all special conditions on record as part of retention 
activities. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Education 
84 Education 

The department will recommend for program completion and teacher 
certification only those candidates who have met the following 
requirements: 

a. 
Recommendation from the major department. 
b. 
Satisfactory Capstone Clinical. 
c. 
Satisfactory attendance record: no late arrivals, early exits, or 
unexcused absences. 
d. 
Attendance at all scheduled seminar meetings. 
e. 
Possession of desirable professional and personal qualities. 
At any time during the Capstone Clinical assignment(s), unsatisfactory 
performance as determined by the University supervisor the director of field 
placements and/or the chair of the Education Department may result in a 
student being withdrawn from the course with a final grade of “F” and 
dismissal from the Education Department. It is the responsibility of the 
student to have knowledge of and be in compliance with all existing 
Pennsylvania State rules and regulations for certification. 

APPLICATION FOR CAPSTONE CLINICAL 

All eligibility requirements must be completed and forwarded to the 
director of field placements by the designated date to qualify: 

• 
Successful completion of student application. 
• 
Maintenance of cumulative GPA of 3.0 required at the time of your 
admission to the Teacher Education program. 
• 
Act 24/82 Form Act 34 and Act 151 Clearances Act 114 FBI Criminal 
History Clearance 
• 
Completion of the Mandatory Reporter Training Course 
• 
Clear TB test 
• 
Completion of all major methods courses, and liberal studies science 
courses. Advisor’s recommendation and signature. 
• 
Some programs have standards above the minimum 3.0 cumulative 
GPA and/or course grade expectations above the minimum grade of C. 
Each candidate should consult with his/her advisor for information 
about specific program requirements related to qualifications for the 
Capstone Clinical. 
DISMISSAL OF A CANDIDATE FROM CAPSTONE CLINICAL PLACEMENT 

Purpose: To establish reasons or a process for removal of a candidate 
from the Capstone Clinical assignment. The first two items are consistent 
with Act 34, Criminal Record Check; the third item establishes a procedure 
for removing a student if the candidate’s behavior is not consistent with 
appropriate expectations of the school district; the fourth item establishes a 
process and assures that the student learns of unsatisfactory progress as 
early as possible; and the fifth item is an appeal process. 

Policy: Students ultimately are guests of the cooperating school districts and 
may be removed at the request of the principal/superintendent. A student 
may also be removed by Mercyhurst University from the student assignment 
for any of the following reasons: 

A. If indicted for a felony, which is covered in the School Code and Act 34, 
there shall be a removal of the student from the school assignment until the 
matter is cleared. When the student is cleared of the indictment, the 
capstone clinical assignment will be extended to cover the time missed. 
B. If convicted of a felony, which is covered in the School Code and Act 34, 
the student will be withdrawn from the capstone clinical assignment and 
will forfeit the time spent during the assignment. 
C. If behavior exhibited by the student is not acceptable to the school 
district, it should be documented by the school administrator/principal in 
collaboration with the cooperating teacher, the university 
supervisor/coordinator, and the director of field placement. If, after 
discussion with the student, improvement is evident, the director of field 
placement will take no further action. 
D. If it is determined by the cooperating teacher or university supervisor that 
the teaching competency of the student is at an unsatisfactory level based 
on the teaching competencies indicated on the evaluation form and not in 
the best interest of the students, a three-way conference of cooperating 
teacher, university supervisor, and the student will be held to discuss the 
concern, possible outcomes, and remedial strategies. 
If, after consultation with the university director of field placement, removal 
from this capstone clinical placement is necessary, the director of field 
placement and the chair of the Education Department shall take this action. 
This behavior should be documented and discussed in the Capstone Clinical 
experience as early as possible. 

E. Decisions made under this policy may be appealed to the dean of the 
Hafenmaier College. 
TRANSFER STUDENTS 

Transfer students seeking to complete their bachelor’s degree at Mercyhurst 
University and teacher certification are required to take a minimum of one-
half of the Education Department Course requirements and one-half of the 
certification content area course requirements at Mercyhurst University. 
Transfer students holding a bachelor’s degree from accredited institutions 
other than Mercyhurst may receive Mercyhurst University recommendation 
for teacher certification upon completion of all requirements established on 
the basis of an evaluation of prospective candidates’ academic and 
experiential credentials by both the chairperson of the Education 
Department and the department director of the certification area. Factors 
considered in this evaluation include: date of course work, date of degree, 
and compatibility of academic and experiential credentials with the current 
academic and professional education requirements of the certificate. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Education 85 Education 
NON-TRADITIONAL STUDENTS EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION PRE-K-4/SPECIAL EDUCATION DUAL 
Access to education programs leading to certification is available for adults MAJOR DEGREE PRE-K-8 
planning mid-career changes, certified persons wishing to add new areas to REQUIREMENTS 
their certificate, and the self-support students who must work while EDEC 101 Early Foundations 3 credits 
completing a program. The non-traditional student should meet with an EDEC 103 Language and Literacy I 3 credits 
Education Department faculty advisor to develop a plan of study that utilizes EDEC 105 Health & Wellness 3 credits 
a variety of options for completion of certification requirements. The non-EDEC 201 Reading Methods 4 credits 
traditional student must meet all admission/retention standards of the EDEC 203 Language and Literacy II 4 credits 
Education Department as well as all the specific standards of the program EDEC 205 Math Methods 4 credits 
offering the certification program. EDEC 207 Observation and Assessment I 3 credits 
EDEC 301 Early Childhood Methods 4 credits 
GRADUATE PROGRAM EDEC 401 Integrated Methods 4 credits 
The Education Department also offers graduate programs of study leading to ESPE 101 Psychology of Diverse Learner 3 credits 
a Master of Science Degree in Secondary Education: Pedagogy and Practice, ESPE 201 Inclusive Practices PreK-8 3 credits 
a Master of Science Degree in Special Education with concentrations in three ESPE 203 Behavior Theories & Practices 3 credits 
areas; Applied Behavior Analysis, Autism, and English as a Second Language ESPE 301 Supporting Literacy PreK-8 3 credits 
Concentration. (See Graduate Programs Catalog.) ESPE 305 Low Incidence Disabilities: Effective 3 credits 
Instructional Practices 
EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION MAJOR PRE-K-4 ESPE 306 Low Incidence Disabilities Clinical 1 credit 
The Early Childhood Education major can be certified to teach pre-school ESPE 307 High Incidence Disabilities: Effective 3 credits 
through grade four. Through the coursework, students develop a knowledge Instructional Practices 
base theory of the teaching/learning process. They develop an ESPE 308 High Incidence Disabilities Clinical 1 credit 
understanding of developmentally appropriate practices with young ECSP 305 Family and Community 3 credits 
children. Throughout their education, students will receive numerous ECSP 307 Observation and Assessment II 3 credits 
clinical experiences working with preschool, kindergarten and primary EDEC 473 Systems, Policies, and Practices 2 credits 
grade children in a variety of settings. EDEC 474 Clinical I -Early Childhood Pre-K – 4 4 credits 
ECSP 475 Capstone Clinical Early 12 credits 
EARLY CHILDHOOD MAJOR DEGREE PRE-K-4 REQUIREMENTS Childhood/Special Education 
EDEC 101 Early Foundations 3 credits EDUC 210 Comparative Issues in Education 3 credits 
EDEC 103 Language & Literacy I 3 credits EDUC 222 Aesthetic Education 3 credits 
EDEC 105 Health & Wellness 3 credits WL 101 Culturally and Linguistically Diverse 3 credits 
EDEC 201 Reading Methods 4 credits Learners 
EDEC 203 Language and Literacy II 4 credits 
EDEC 205 Math Methods 4 credits K-12 EDUCATION MAJOR 
EDEC 207 Observation and Assessment I 3 credits Teacher certification for grades kindergarten through grade 12 is available in 
EDEC 301 Early Childhood Methods 4 credits the following academic areas of study: Art (K-12), World Language (French, 
EDEC 401 Integrated Methods 4 credits Spanish (K-12)), Music (K-12). K-12 Education majors must fulfill the 
ECSP 305 Family and Community 3 credits requirements for admission to the K-12 Education Program and to the 
ECSP 307 Observation & Assessment II 3 credits selected academic department of the major. 
ESPE 201 Inclusive Practices PreK-8 3 credits 
ESPE 203 Behavior Theories and Practices 3 credits Students who are seeking certification in any of the K-12 education areas 
ESPE 301 Supporting Literacy PreK-8 3 credits must complete the prescribed courses in their major area and the education 
EDEC 473 Systems, Policies, and Practices 2 credits courses listed below. All of the education courses must be taken in 
EDEC 474 Clinical I -Early Childhood Pre-K -4 4 credits sequence, and must be completed before a student can begin the Capstone 
EDEC 475 Capstone Clinical Early Childhood 12 credits Clinical (see below). All Capstone Clinical assignments will be for a 12-week 
PreK-4 period. The Capstone Clinical experience is normally during the fall and 
EDUC 210 Comparative Issues in Education 3 credits spring semesters. Final approval for the Capstone Clinical will be sent to 
EDUC 222 Aesthetic Education 3 credits students who have successfully met the requirements listed by the 
ESPE 101 Psychology of Diverse Learners 3 credits Department of Education, recommendation from the major Department, 
WL 101 Culturally and Linguistically Diverse 3 credits and possession of desirable professional and personal qualities as evidenced 
Learners by successful completion of all clinical experiences. 
3 Education Electives 9 credits 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Education 86 Education 

Sophomores are required to make formal application for admission to the K12 
Education Program during the spring semester of that school year. 
Application for admission into the K-12 Education program beyond the 
sophomore year may result in extending the normal four-year university 
period for meeting graduation/certification requirements. 

LEVEL I 

FRESHMAN/SOPHOMORE YEARS 

ESPE 101 Psychology of Diverse Learners 3 credits 
WL 101 Culturally and Linguistically Diverse 3 credits 
Learners 

LEVEL II 

SOPHOMORE YEAR 
EDUC 210 Comparative Issues in Education 3 credits 
ESPE 201 Inclusive Practices PreK-8 3 credits 

LEVEL III 

JUNIOR YEAR: 
Content area methods courses 
ESPE 301 Supporting Literacy PreK-8 3 credits 

LEVEL IV 

SENIOR YEAR 
EDUC 474 Clinical -Secondary Education(K-12) 3 credits 
EDUC 475 Capstone Clinical 12 credits 

SPECIAL EDUCATION CERTIFICATION PRE-K-8 

Combined with the Early Childhood PreK-4 program, the Special Education 
curriculum offerings are designed to enable the teacher candidate to 
develop and demonstrate the attainment of professional qualities, 
attitudes, and critical performance skills considered essential for successful 
teaching of exceptional children from pre-kindergarten through grade 8. To 
obtain a special education degree through Mercyhurst University, the 
teacher candidate must complete the requirements for dual certification 
with the Early Childhood PreK-4 program. 

SPECIAL EDUCATION MINOR DEGREE REQUIREMENTS 

ESPE 101 Psychology of Diverse Learners 3 credits 
ESPE 201 Inclusive Practices PreK-8 3 credits 
ESPE 203 Behavior Theories & Practices 3 credits 
ESPE 301 Supporting Literacy PreK-8 3 credits 
ESPE 305 Low Incidence Disabilities: Effective 3 credits 

Instructional Practices 
ESPE 306 Low Incidence Disabilities Clinical 1 credit 
ESPE 307 High Incidence Disabilities: Effective 3 credits 

Instructional Practices 
ESPE 308 High Incidence Disabilities Clinical 1 credit 
ECSP 307 Observation & Assessment II 3 credits 

APPLIED BEHAVIOR ANALYSIS (ABA) CONCENTRATION REQUIREMENTS 

The Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) Concentration allows students to gain 
specialized knowledge and additional proficiency in the concepts and 
principles of behavior analysis that can be used with diverse populations 
(e.g., schools, prisons, health and fitness centers, hospitals, organizations). 
Offered in collaboration with the Psychology Department, the ABA 
Concentration prepares students with the skills needed to describe, 
understand, predict, and modify behavioral processes, with an overall aim of 
promoting health enhancing behaviors. Students who successfully complete 
this concentration will be eligible to take a national certification exam to 
become a Board Certified Assistant Behavior Analyst (BCaBA), sponsored by 
the Behavior Analysis Certification Board (BACB). 

Students seeking to pursue this concentration must have completed PSYC 
281, Behavior Modification, before starting in on the Core Sequence. 

The CORE sequence includes: 

PSYC 282 Basic Principles of Applied Behavior 3 credits 
Analysis 
PSYC 283 Behavioral Research: Single Subject 3 credits 
Design 
PSYC 284 Advanced Principles of Applied Behavior 3 credits 
Analysis 
PSYC Intensive Practicum: Applied Behavior 9 credits 
482/483/484 Analysis 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


ENGLISH 
87 ENGLISH 


ENGLISH 

DEPARTMENT CHAIR: 

Christina Riley Brown, Ph.D. 

FACULTY 

Professors: 

Heidi Hosey, Ph.D.; Brian Reed, Ph.D.; Jeffrey Roessner, Ph.D. 

Associate Professors: 

Sr. Lisa M. McCartney, Ph.D.; Christina Rieger, Ph.D.; Christina Riley 
Brown, Ph.D. 

Assistant Professors: 

Brett D. Johnson, Ph.D.; Joanne McGurk, Ph.D.; Marnie Sullivan, Ph.D. 

Instructor: 

Gregory Brown, Ph.D. 

INTRODUCTION 

The English Department constitutes a major humanizing force within the 
university. Our courses engage with diverse literary and cultural texts, giving 
our students the opportunity to practice critical reading and effective 
writing, thus preparing students for career options and advanced study. 
English majors develop skills in writing, information literacy and research, 
oral communication, cultural awareness, reading comprehension, and 
literary analysis. 

The English Department at Mercyhurst offers a B.A. in English, as well as the 
following concentrations: Creative Writing, Professional Writing: Text, 
Image and Design, Secondary English Education, and Pre-Law. The English 
department also houses the Theatre Minor and the Film Studies Minor. 
These programs allow students to personalize their studies while acquiring 
the breadth of knowledge and skills found in the traditional English major. 

The English Department sponsors the Mercyhurst Literary Festival, the 
Mercyhurst Theatre Program, and Lumen, the campus arts journal. We have 
a chapter of Sigma Tau Delta, an international honor society formed to 
recognize English majors and minors who achieve high standards of 
excellence in their chosen linguistic or literary fields. 

ENGLISH DEPARTMENT MISSION STATEMENT 

The Department of English offers programs of study that teach students to 
think critically and imaginatively about literature, language and culture. Our 
goal is to produce discerning and creative readers, writers and thinkers who 
have the communication skills needed to excel professionally. English 
majors and minors study challenging American, British and world texts, 
while cultivating their skills in oral communication, digital literacy, creative 
writing, research and information literacy, and professional writing. 

DEPARTMENT REQUIREMENTS 

English majors must maintain an overall 2.0 GPA. English majors with a 
concentration in Secondary Education preparation must maintain an overall 

3.0 GPA and at least a 3.0 GPA in their major courses. English majors must 
earn a C or better in any course from the major meant to fulfill a degree 
requirement. No required course in the major may be taken on a Pass/Fail 
basis. All English majors are highly encouraged to take an internship and/or 
study abroad. All majors will undergo a sophomore review with their 
advisor during their sophomore year of study or upon transferring into the 
English major. 
MASTER'S DEGREE IN SECONDARY EDUCATION REQUIREMENTS 

In order to receive the master’s degree and certification in secondary 
education, students must meet all of the requirements outlined in the 
Education department section of the college catalog. Please refer to all 
standards, policies and admission/retention criteria as specified for all 
students in the master’s degree program seeking the degree and 
certification by the Pennsylvania Department of Education. 

PROGRAM STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 

1. 
Demonstrate the key elements of successful writing (e.g., thesis 
and organization) when writing for a variety of purposes and 
audiences. 
2. 
Analyze texts in a variety of ways (e.g., cultural, historical and 
theoretical approaches) in order to be familiar with critical 
approaches and situate texts within their cultural, political and 
historical contexts. 
3. 
Independently deliver an effective oral presentation. 
4. 
Find, assess and correctly utilize appropriate research materials. 
ENGLISH CONCENTRATION STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 
Creative Writing: Compose work that demonstrates proficiency in 
handling the formal elements of a creative writing genre. 

Professional Writing: Text, Image, and Design: Prepare and deliver a 
project that demonstrates written, verbal and digital communication skills 
needed to negotiate current professional writing contexts. 

Secondary English Education: Demonstrate the written and 
communication skills needed to be a successful secondary English teacher. 

Pre-Law Concentration: Prepare and deliver a project that demonstrates 
the written and verbal communication skills needed for a career in law. 

DEGREE REQUIREMENTS SECTION 

ENGLISH MAJOR 

Mercyhurst’s Bachelor of Arts degree in English provides a foundation in 
writing, literature, language and communication to prepare students for 
careers or advanced degrees. The curriculum focuses on composition that 
encourages effective use of language for good communication, as well as 
study of early and modern literature, which promotes a deeper 
understanding of the human experience. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


ENGLISH 88 ENGLISH 


Required English Major Courses (45 Credits): 

ENG 200 Literary Studies 3 credits 
ENG 205 Intro to the English Major 3 credits 


CHOOSE ONE: 

ENG 215 American Literature I 3 credits 
ENG 251 Early American Literature 3 credits 
ENG 253 American Renaissance 3 credits 
CHOOSE ONE: 
ENG 216 American Literature II 3 credits 
ENG 261 American Realism 3 credits 
ENG 263 American Modernism 3 credits 
CHOOSE ONE: 
ENG 217 British Literature I 3 credits 
ENG 220 Medieval Literature 3 credits 
ENG 224 English Renaissance 3 credits 
ENG 228 Restoration & 18th Century Literature 3 credits 
CHOOSE ONE: 
ENG 218 British Literature II 3 credits 
ENG 230 British Romanticism 3 credits 
ENG 234 Victorian Literature 3 credits 
ENG 238 British/Irish Modernism 3 credits 
TAKE 6 CREDITS OF EITHER: 
200 Level ENG/THEA Elective 
or 
300 Level ENG/THEA Elective 
TAKE THE FOLLOWING 
300 Level Seminar in British Literature 3 credits 
300 Level Seminar in American Literature 3 credits 
CHOOSE ONE: 
ENG 360 3 credits 
ENG 362 Contemporary Poetry 3 credits 
ENG 364 Postmodern Literature 3 credits 
CHOOSE ONE: 
ENG 370 African-American Literature 3 credits 
ENG 374 Women and Literature 3 credits 
ENG 378 Seminar in Multicultural Literature 
TAKE THE FOLLOWING COURSE: 
ENG 344 Shakespeare 3 credits 
or 
ENG 328 ST: Major Author 3 credits 
ENG 391 Literary Criticism 3 credits 
ENG 490 Senior English Project 3 credits 
ENGLISH MAJOR -CREATIVE WRITING 

In this program, students gain practical experience writing both poetry and 
fiction in small workshops and seminars. The aim of this coursework is for 
students to produce publishable work under the close guidance of our 
experienced faculty. The English faculty strongly encourage students to 
refine their editing skills by working on the staff of Lumen, Mercyhurst 
University's arts journal. Additionally, each year the department hosts the 
Mercyhurst Literary Festival, which gives students a chance to meet and 
attend workshops with renowned writers from across the country. 
Ultimately, students graduate from the program ready to pursue careers as 

writers and editors in the publishing industry or to attend graduate school 
to further develop their craft. 

Required English Major with Creative Writing Concentration (45 

Credits) 
ENG 205 Intro to the English Major 3 credits 
CHOOSE ONE: 
ENG 215 American Literature I 3 credits 
ENG 251 Early American Literature 3 credits 
ENG 253 American Renaissance 3 credits 
CHOOSE ONE: 
ENG 216 American Literature II 3 credits 
ENG 261 American Realism 3 credits 
ENG 263 American Modernism 3 credits 
CHOOSE ONE: 
ENG 217 British Literature I 3 credits 
ENG 220 Medieval Literature 3 credits 
ENG 224 English Renaissance 3 credits 
ENG 228 3 credits 
CHOOSE ONE: 
ENG 218 British Literature II 3 credits 
ENG 230 British Romanticism 3 credits 
ENG 234 Victorian Literature 3 credits 
ENG 238 British/Irish Modernism 3 credits 

TAKE THE FOLLOWING 

200 Level ENG/THEA Elective (3 credits) 

or 

300 Level ENG/THEA Elective (3 credits) 
300 Level Elective Seminar 3 credits 
300 Level Elective Seminar 3 credits 

CHOOSE ONE: 

ENG 360 3 credits 
ENG 362 Contemporary Poetry 3 credits 
ENG 364 Postmodern Literature 3 credits 

TAKE THE FOLLOWING 

ENG 344 Shakespeare 3 credits 

or 
ENG 328 ST: Major Author 3 credits 
ENG 391 Literary Criticism 3 credits 
ENG 280 Introduction to Creative Writing 3 credits 
ENG 380 Creative Writing: Poetry 3 credits 
ENG 384 Creative Writing: Fiction 3 credits 
ENG 490 Senior English Project 3 credits 

ENGLISH MAJOR – SECONDARY EDUCATION CONCENTRATION 

The English major with a Secondary Education concentration prepares 
students who want to teach English in secondary level classrooms. Students 
study in the English department for four years and earn a B.A. in English, 
and then they matriculate into the Education Department for their fifth and 
final year. Upon completion, students graduate with a master’s degree in 
Education. Classes in the English department prepare students to teach all 
levels of high school English. English majors with a concentration in 
Secondary Education must maintain an overall 3.0 GPA and at least a 3.0 
GPA in their major courses. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


ENGLISH 89 ENGLISH 


Required English Education Concentration Courses (51 Credits) 

ENG 205 Intro to the English Major 3 credits 
CHOOSE ONE: 
ENG 215 American Literature I 3 credits 
ENG 251 Early American Literature 3 credits 
ENG 253 American Renaissance 3 credits 
CHOOSE ONE: 
ENG 216 American Literature II 3 credits 
ENG 261 American Realism 3 credits 
ENG 263 American Modernism 3 credits 
CHOOSE ONE: 
ENG 217 British Literature I 3 credits 
ENG 220 Medieval Literature 3 credits 
ENG 224 English Renaissance 3 credits 
ENG 228 Restoration & 18th Century Literature 3 credits 
CHOOSE ONE: 
ENG 218 British Literature II 3 credits 
ENG 230 British Romanticism 3 credits 
ENG 234 Victorian Literature 3 credits 
ENG 238 British/Irish Modernism 3 credits 
300 Level Seminar in British Literature 3 credits 
300 Level Seminar in American Literature 3 credits 
CHOOSE ONE: 
ENG 370 African American Literature 3 credits 
ENG 374 Women and Literature 3 credits 
ENG 378 Seminar in Multicultural Literature 3 credits 
CHOOSE ONE: 
ENG 360 3 credits 
ENG 362 Contemporary Poetry 3 credits 
ENG 364 Postmodern Literature 3 credits 
ENG 314 Teaching Writing: Pedagogy and Practice 3 credits 
ENG 317 Professional and Public Discourse 3 credits 
ENG 318 Applied Linguistics 3 credits 
ENG 344 Shakespeare (or Major Author) 3 credits 
ENG 391 Literary Theory and Criticism 3 credits 
ENG 490 Senior English Project 3 credits 
EDUC 210 Comparative Issues in Education (JR/SR year) 3 credits 
WL 101 Culturally and Linguistically Diverse Learners 3 credits 
(JR/SR year) 
ENGLISH MAJOR -PRE-LAW CONCENTRATION 

The course of study offered for the English major with a Pre-Law 
concentration is well suited to develop the skills desirable for law school. 
According to the Law School Admissions Council, no particular 
undergraduate education is recommended; students are admitted to law 
school from almost every academic discipline. They write, “Law schools 
want students who can think critically and write well, and who have some 
understanding of the forces that have shaped the human experience. 
Among the abilities named by the American Bar Association as important 
preparation for law school are analytic/problem-solving skills, critical 
reading abilities, oral communication and listening abilities, research skills, 
organization and management skills, and the values of serving faithfully the 
interests of others while promoting justice.” Our curriculum teaches 
students to read and comprehend complex texts with accuracy and insight, 

the ability to think critically, and to analyze and evaluate the reasoning and 
arguments of others. 

Required English Major with Pre-Law Concentration Courses (48 

Credits) 
ENG 200 Literary Studies 3 credits 
ENG 205 Intro to the English Major 3 credits 
CHOOSE ONE: 
ENG 215 American Literature I 3 credits 
ENG 216 American Literature II 3 credits 
ENG 251 Early American Literature 3 credits 
ENG 253 American Renaissance 3 credits 
ENG 261 American Realism 3 credits 
ENG 263 American Modernism 3 credits 
CHOOSE ONE: 
ENG 217 British Literature I 3 credits 
ENG 218 British Literature II 3 credits 
ENG 220 3 credits 
ENG 224 Medieval Literature 3 credits 
ENG 228 Restoration & 18th Century Literature 3 credits 
ENG 230 British Romanticism 3 credits 
ENG 234 Victorian Literature 3 credits 
ENG 238 British/Irish Modernism 3 credits 
ENG 241 Intro to Professional Writing 3 credits 

300-Level Seminar in Literature Elective 3 credits 
300-Level Seminar in Literature Elective 3 credits 
ENG 310 Advanced Composition 3 credits 
ENG 317 Professional and Public Discourse 3 credits 
ENG 391 Literary Theory and Criticism 3 credits 
ENG 490 Senior English Project 3 credits 

Five Concentration Electives in Pre-Law Program: 

PHIL 101 Introduction to Logic 3 credits 
CRJS/POLI 322 Legal Research & Writing 3 credits 
CRJS 310 Constitutional Law in Criminal 3 credits 

Procedure 
OR 
POLI 421 Constitutional Law 3 credits 
OR 
POLI 422 Civil Liberties 3 credits 
BADM 310 Business Law 3 credits 
Co-op/Internship or approved elective 3 credits 

ENGLISH MAJOR – PROFESSIONAL WRITING: TEXT, IMAGE, DESIGN 
CONCENTRATION 

The English major with a Professional Writing: Text, Image, and Design 
concentration allows students to acquire a grounding in the theory and 
practices of rhetoric in a digital age. The curriculum of the concentration is 
interdisciplinary so that students will be able to engage in hands-on 
experiences in professional writing, including computer design and the use 
of digital imagery. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


ENGLISH 90 ENGLISH 


Required Professional Writing: Text, Image and Design 
Concentration Courses (52 credits) 

ENG 200 Literary Studies 3 credits 
Or 
ENG 210 Film Studies 3 credits 
ENG 205 Intro to the English Major 3 credits 
ART 128 Computer Design Basics 3 credits 
ART 320 Type and Publication Design 3 credits 
ENG 214 Introduction to Professional Writing 3 credits 
ENG 311 Editing and Style 3 credits 
ENG 315 Writing for the Web 3 credits 
ENG 317 Professional and Public Discourse 3 credits 
TAKE TWO: 
200 Level Literature Elective 3 credits 
OR 
300 Level Literature Elective 3 credits 
TAKE ONE: 
300 Level Seminar in Literature 3 credits 
TAKE ALL THE FOLLOWING: 
ENG 360 3 credits 
ENG 362 Contemporary Poetry 3 credits 
ENG 364 Postmodern Literature 3 credits 
ENG 475 English Internship 3 credits 
ENG 490 Senior English Project 3 credits 
TAKE TWO Additional Electives (chosen from below) 
ART 221 Digital Imagery 3 credits 
ART 225 Computer Illustration Techniques 3 credits 
ART 321 Introduction to Website Design 3 credits 
(Please note Pre-req Art 221) 
ART 325 Intermediate Web Design 3 credits 
MIS130 3D Modeling and Animation I 3 credits 
300 Level Seminar in English/Theatre 3 credits 
300 Level Seminar in English/Theatre 3 credits 

ENGLISH MINOR PROGRAMS 

The English minor programs housed in the English department complement 
any course of study. English minors must maintain an overall 2.0 GPA. No 
required course in the minor may be taken on a Pass/Fail basis. 

ENGLISH MINOR (21 Credits) 

ENG 200 Literary Studies 3 credits 
ENG 205 Introduction to English Major/Minor 3credits 
TAKE ONE: 
ENG 215 American Literature I 3 credits 
ENG 216 American Literature II 3 credits 
ENG 251 Early American Literature 3 credits 
ENG 253 American Renaissance 3 credits 
ENG 261 American Realism 3 credits 
ENG 263 American Modernism 3 credits 
TAKE ONE: 
ENG 217 British Literature I 3 credits 
ENG 218 British Literature II 3 credits 
ENG 220 Medieval Literature 3 credits 
ENG 224 English Renaissance 3 credits 
ENG 228 Restoration & 28th Century Literature 3 credits 
ENG 230 British Romanticism 3 credits 
ENG 234 Victorian Literature 3 credits 
ENG 238 British/Irish Modernism 3 credits 
Choose 3 of the following 
ENG 271 3 credits 
ENG 328 Special Topics in Literature 3 credits 
ENG 330 The English Drama 3 credits 
ENG 332 The English Novel 3 credits 
ENG 334 Shakespeare 3 credits 
ENG 336 3 credits 
ENG 338 Seminar in British Literature 3 credits 
ENG 351 Southern Literature 3 credits 
ENG 353 American Counter Culture: Fiction 3 credits 
ENG 355 3 credits 
ENG 356 Modern Drama 3 credits 
ENG 357 3 credits 
ENG 358 Seminar in American Literature 3 credits 
ENG 360 3 credits 
ENG 362 Contemporary Poetry 3 credits 
ENG 364 Postmodern Literature 3 credits 
ENG 370 African American Literature 3 credits 
ENG 374 Women and Literature 3 credits 
ENG 378 Seminar in Multicultural Literature 3 credits 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Environmental Science 91 Environmental Science 

CREATIVE WRITING MINOR (21 Credits) 

Seeking to gain experience and skill in composing fiction, poetry or creative 
nonfiction, a Creative Writing minor takes courses in fiction and poetry 
writing as follows: 
ENG 200 Literary Studies 3 credits 
ENG 205 Introduction to English Major/Minor 3 credits 
CHOOSE ONE: 

ENG 360 3 credits 
ENG 362 Contemporary Poetry 3 credits 
ENG 364 Postmodern Literature 3 credits 
Choose 1 of the following pre-seminar or seminar electives 3 credits 
ENG 215, 216, 217, 218, 330, 344, 328, 332, 334, 336, 338, 
351, 353, 355, 356, 357, 356, 358, 360, 362, 364, 370, 374, 
378, 316 
ENG 280 Introduction to Creative Writing 3 credits 
ENG 380 Creative Writing Fiction 3 credits 
ENG 384 Creative Writing Poetry 3 credits 

PROFESSIONAL WRITING: IMAGE, TEXT, AND DESIGN MINOR (21 
Credits) 

Seeking advanced competency in professional writing to correspond with a 
primary degree field, a Professional Writing minor takes courses in advanced 
writing, theory and language as follows: 
ENG 200 Literary Studies 3 credits 
OR 

ENG 210 Film Studies 3 credits 
ENG 205 Intro to the English Major/Minor 3 credits 
Choose 1 of the following pre-seminar or seminar electives: 3 credits 
ENG 215, 216, 217, 218, 330, 344, 328, 332, 334, 336, 338, 
351, 353, 355, 356, 357, 356, 358, 360, 362, 364, 370, 374, 
378, 316 
ENG 214 Introduction to Professional Writing 3 credits 
ENG 311 Editing and Style 3 credits 
ENG 315 Writing for the Web 3 credits 
ENG 317 Professional and Public Discourse 3 credits 

FILM STUDIES MINOR (18 Credits) 

The Film minor at Mercyhurst gives students the critical perspective with 
which to analyze motion pictures within larger artistic, cultural, historical, 
political, psychological and international contexts. The Film Studies minor 
allows students to understand and critically engage the images that 
pervade our lives. As film is a major narrative art form—arguably the 
dominant one—of the 20th and 21st centuries, this minor allows students 
the opportunity to study and appreciate it as such. 
The interdisciplinary courses required for the program allow students to gain 
a solid grounding in the vocabulary and theory of film studies while giving 
them flexibility to pursue their interests in various cinematic periods and 
styles. 

REQUIRED COURSEWORK 

ENG 190 Introduction to Film 3 credits 
ENG 210 Special Topics in Film 3 credits 
ENG 290 Film Narrative and Theory 3 credits 

(Recommend ENG 190 as prerequisite) 

Three additional film electives, chosen with your minor advisor. 
These classes might include: 

COM 160 Film Appreciation 3 credits 
ENG 328 Special Topics in Literature and Film 3 credits 
HIS 232 African Americans In Film 3 credits 
FREN 315 French Cinema 3 credits 
PHIL 150 Philosophical Studies:Film & Philosophy 3 credits 
PHIL 370 Special Topics in Philosophy and Film 3 credits 
POLI 346 Political Cinema 3 credits 
PSYC 274 Psychology In Film 3 credits 
RIAP 316 Cinematic Mirror Of Intelligence In Film 3 credits 
RLST 235 The Sacred & Cinema 3 credits 

THEATRE MINOR (18 Credits) 

The Theatre minor provides students with the aesthetic, analytical, and 
interpersonal skills necessary for productive and reflective lives of leadership 
and service. The required courses provide a breadth of knowledge about the 
various disciplines of theatre, while the electives allow students to develop 
proficiency in one area, such as performance, design, or theatre history and 
dramatic literature. 

THEA110 Acting I 3 credits 
ENG/THEA245 Script Analysis: From Page to Stage 3 credits 
ENG/THEA290 Topics in Theatre History 3 credits 
THEA320 Advanced Acting Workshop 3 credits 
OR 
ENG/THEA358 Seminar in Theatre 3 credits 

Two Electives chosen from the following courses: 

DANC100 Dance Appreciation 3 credits 
ENG200 Literary Studies 3 credits 
ENG316 Oral Interpretation 3 credits 
ENG330 The English Drama 3 credits 
ENG334 Shakespeare 3 credits 
FASH 120 Contemporary Fashion Analysis 3 credits 
FASH 130 Introduction to Fashion Construction 3 credits 
FASH330 Textiles I: Fiber to Fabric 3 credits 
FASH 410 Fashion Evolution 3 credits 
FREN132 French Theatre in English Translation 3 credits 
ID100 Design Basic 3 credits 
ID220 History of Interior Design and 3 credits 

Architecture I 
ID221 History of Interior Design and 3 credits 

Architecture II 
ID380 Color and Light 3 credits 
MUS104 Music History I 3 credits 
MUS105 Music History II 3 credits 
THEA140 Special Topics in Theatre 3 credits 
THEA220 Acting II 3 credits 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Environmental Science 92 Environmental Science 

Environmental Science 

DEPARTMENT CO-CHAIRS 

J. Michael Campbell, Ph.D. 
Nicholas Lang, Ph.D. 
FACULTY 

Professors: 

J. Michael Campbell, Ph.D. 
Associate Professors: 

Nicholas Lang, Ph.D. 

Assistant Professors: 

Sara Turner, Ph.D. 
Christopher R. Dolanc, Ph.D. 
Scott McKenzie, B.S. 


Lecturers: 

Paul Ashcraft, M.S. 

Sarah Bennett, M.S. 

INTRODUCTION 

Environmental science operates at the intersection between humans and 
the natural world. It is a complex field that requires students to understand 
how physical, chemical and biological phenomena on varying scales interact 
with human systems and the structures and challenges imposed by 
governmental policies, economics, and social problems. The success of an 
environmental professional at addressing environmental problems requires 
an interdisciplinary perspective and knowledge about how to sensitively 
select and use the right tools to assess and address problems. 

Mercyhurst’s Environmental Science program has been designed as a 
natural science-focused program offering students opportunities to 
specialize in either biology or geology field studies, and including a slate of 
liberal arts courses that prepares students for a broad range of possible 
careers in environmental consulting, sustainability leadership, conservation 
and restoration science, green energy and environmental education. 
Coursework includes deep upper-level disciplinary and interdisciplinary 
coursework to provide students with diverse hands-on technical skills and 
practical experience within the respective environmental science geology 
and biology curricula. 

The program is complementary to the university’s existing majors in 
Biology, Geology and Sustainability Studies, which provided a foundation 
for the development of Environmental Science. Special facilities available to 

students in this program include two major natural areas owned by the 
University within the Pennsylvania Lake Erie watershed: the Jean B. and J. 
Douglas James Ecological & Wildlife Preserve and the Mary Jo and Ed Maier 
Field Station. 

Mercyhurst is a full member and active participant in the Regional Science 
Consortium, a collaborative, nonprofit organization which focuses on and 
coordinates educational and research projects for Lake Erie and the upper 
Ohio River Basin, offering college courses and research opportunities to 
students from more than a dozen regional colleges and universities at the 
Tom Ridge Environmental Center. Consortium facilities available to 
Mercyhurst biology students include well-equipped research and teaching 
laboratories, classrooms, greenhouse, natural history collections, sampling 
equipment and research vessels. 

MISSION STATEMENT 

The primary mission of the Mercyhurst University Environmental Science 
Program is to educate students in physical, biological and social sciences, 
making them reflectively aware of the natural environment in which they 
live, equipped to serve as globally responsible stewards of the Earth and its 
resources, and prepared to advance successful solutions to address 
environmental issues. Central keys to advance this mission are a 
commitment to immersing students in a broad exposure to the diverse 
perspectives that are necessary to address complex environmental 
problems, combined with deep experiential disciplinary learning through 
rigorous field-centered class and laboratory activities, practical hands-on 
field experiences, collaborative faculty-student research, and travel-learning 
experiences that will take students beyond the boundaries of our local 
environments. 

PROGRAM STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 

The Environmental Science Program has identified six learning outcomes 
that all students should meet before they earn their degree. Upon 
completion of the Environmental Science curriculum all students should be 
able to: 

Understand the natural environment and its relationships with human 
activities. 

Characterize and analyze human impacts on the environment. 

Integrate facts, concepts and methods from multiple disciplines and apply 
to environmental problems. 

Acquire practical skills for scientific problem-solving, including familiarity 
with laboratory and field instrumentation, computer applications, statistical 
and modeling techniques. 

Understand and implement scientific research strategies, including 
collection, management, evaluation, and interpretation of environmental 
data. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Environmental Science 93 Environmental Science 

Design and evaluate strategies, technologies, and methods for sustainable 
management of environmental systems and for the remediation or 
restoration of degraded environments. 

ADVISING 

To ensure that students in the program are successful in the long term, the 
advising program will institute a Sophomore Review process, directed by 
each student’s primary advisor in geology or biology. During the review 
process, the student, with guidance from the advisor, will be required to 
develop a detailed curricular plan for the third and fourth year of the 
student’s program, and will be assigned a second advisor from the other 
department (biology or geology), whom the student will consult with for 
final approval of their environmental science degree plan. This process 
provides environmental science students the benefit of two different science 
disciplinary perspectives for developing skill-building and capstone project 
course decisions, which will have a profound effect on the subsequent 
success of the student in advancing to a professional position or graduate 
school. 

REQUIREMENTS 

The Environmental Science program offers courses leading to a Bachelor of 
Arts (B.A.) or Bachelor of Science (B.S.) degree in Biology Field Studies or 
Geology Field Studies. Students who expect to attend graduate school after 
graduation are strongly encouraged to pursue the Bachelor of Science (B.S.) 
degree. Environmental Science majors must maintain a 2.50 GPA in the 
major program as well as an overall GPA of 2.50. To be recommended for 
graduation, a student must earn at least a 2.5 grade point average in the 
required major courses and labs. A student also must earn a grade of a C or 
better in any course from the major discipline that is to fulfill a degree 
requirement. No required course may be taken on a Pass/Fail basis. No 
required courses may be taken at another institution without prior approval. 

ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE – BIOLOGY FIELD STUDIES 
Major Core Courses 

ENVS 105 Introduction to Environmental 3 credits 
Studies 
BIO 146/147 Ecology & Evolutionary Biology of 4 credits 
Organisms & Lab 
SCI 170 Energy Science and Lab 4 credits 
GEOL 100/102 Physical Geology & Lab 4 credits 
BIO 210/211 Botany & Lab 4 credits 
BIO 292/293 Field Ecology & Lab 4 credits 
GEOL 288 Energy and Environmental Justice 3 credits 
GEOL 306 Soils & Lab 4 credits 
BIO 426 Limnology& Lab 4 credits 
OR 
SCI 225 Oceanography 4 credits 
GEOL 400/401 Introduction to GIS & Lab 4 credits 

Environment-themed Non-Science Courses 

In consultation with advisors, choose two of the following: 
POLI 395 Environmental Politics 3 credits 
POLI 321 Environmental Law 3 credits 
HIS 221 U.S. Environmental History 3 credits 
ECON 250 Economics of Poverty 3 credits 
ECON 260 Environmental Economics and 3 credits 

Policy 
ENGL 328 Environmental Writing 3 credits 
PUBH 201 Environmental Health 3 credits 

Upper-level Biology, Field Studies and Travel Courses 

In consultation with advisors, choose three of the following: 
BIO198/199 Tropical Marine Biology & Lab 4 credits 
BIO 200/201 Microbiology & Lab 4 credits 
BIO 230/231 Invertebrate Zoology & Lab 4 credits 
BIO 272/273 Forest Ecology & Lab 4 credits 
BIO 290 Environmental Physiology 3 credits 
FSAT 300 Aquatic Ecology (Travel Abroad) 3 credits 
BIO 354/355 Biology of Insects & Lab 4 credits 
BIO 392 Field Botany 3 credits 
BIO 424 Restoration Ecology 3 credits 

Upper-level Science Electives 

In consultations with advisors, choose two science courses 
GEOL, BIO, or CHEM 200 Level or Higher 6 credits 

Environmental Science Capstone Course 

Choose one of the following: 
ENVS 474 Environmental Practicum 3 credits 
ENVS 475 Environmental Science Internship 3 credits 
ENVS 490 Environmental Science Thesis 3 credits 

Bachelor of Science (B.S.) Math and Chemistry Courses 

STAT 137 Biostatistics 3 credits 
MATH 170 Calculus I 4 credits 
CHEM 121 General Chemistry I 3 credits 
CHEM 122 General Chemistry I Lab 1 credit 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Environmental Science 94 Environmental Science 
Bachelor of Arts (B.A.) Math and Chemistry Courses Upper-level Science Electives 
STAT 137 Biostatistics 3 credits In consultations with advisors, choose two science courses 
MATH 118 Mathematics for the Natural Sciences 4 credits GEOL, BIO, or CHEM 200 Level or Higher 6 credits 
CHEM 111 Chemistry of Life 3 credits 
CHEM 112 Chemistry of Life Lab 1 credit Environmental Science Capstone Course 

(College Algebra and Trigonometry MATH 111 + 112) may be substituted 

for MATH 118 

ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE – GEOLOGY FIELD STUDIES 

Major Core Courses 
ENVS 105 Introduction to Environmental 
Studies 
BIO 146/147 Ecology & Evolutionary Biology of 
Organisms and Lab 
GEOL 100/102 Physical Geology and Lab 
BIO 210/211 Botany and Lab 
GEOL 215/216 Geomorphology and Lab 
GEOL 255 Field Methods in Geology 
GEOL 260/261 Hydrogeology and Lab 
GEOL 288 Energy and Environmental Justice 
GEOL 306/307 Soils and Lab 
GEOL 400/401 Introduction to GIS and Lab 

Environment-themed Non-Science Courses 

In consultation with advisors, choose two of the following: 
POLI 395 Environmental Politics 
POLI 321 Environmental Law 
HIS 221 U.S. Environmental History 
ECON 250 Economics of Poverty 
ECON 260 Environmental Economics and Policy 
ENGL 328 Environmental Writing 
STAT 137 Biostatistics 
PUBH 201 Environmental Health 

3 credits 

4 credits 

4 credits 
4 credits 
4 credits 
4 credits 
4 credits 
3 credits 
4 credits 
4 credits 

3 credits 
3 credits 
3 credits 
3 credits 
3 credits 
3 credits 
3 credits 
3 credits 

Upper-level Geology, Field Studies and Travel Courses4 

In consultation with advisors, choose three of the following: 

GEOL 205/206 Cities on Volcanoes and Lab 4 credits 
GEOL 211/212 Mineralogy and Lab 4 credits 
GEOL 235/236 Paleoclimatology and Lab 4 credits 
GEOL 342/343 Sedimentology & Stratigraphy 4 credits 
and Lab 
GEOL 250/251 Structural Geology and Lab 4 credits 
GEOL 370 Dendrochronology 3 credits 
GEOL 380/381 Principles of Remote Sensing 4 credits 
and Lab 
GEOL 430/431 Geoarchaeology and Lab 4 credits 

Choose one of the following: 
ENVS 474 Environmental Practicum 3 credits 
ENVS 475 Environmental Science Internship 3 credits 
ENVS 490 Environmental Science Thesis 3 credits 

Bachelor of Science (B.S.) Math and Chemistry Courses 

STAT 137 Biostatistics 3 credits 
MATH 170 Calculus I 4 credits 
CHEM 121/122 General Chemistry I and Lab 4 credits 

Bachelor of Arts (B.A.) Math Courses 

STAT 137 Statistics 3 credits 
MATH 118 Mathematics for the Natural Sciences 4 credits 
OR 
CHEM 111/112 Chemistry of Life & Lab 4 credits 

ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE MINOR 

In addition to a major in Environmental Science, we offer a minor in this 
discipline as well. Course requirements are below: 

ENVS 105 Intro to Environmental Studies 3 credits 
GEOL Physical Geology/Lab 4 credits 
100/102 
BIO 146/147 Ecology and Evolutionary Biology of 4 credits 

Organisms/Lab 
Three additional classes at the 200 level or higher with an 9-12 credits 
environmental theme and that are approved by the minor 
advisor* 
*At least two of the additional 200-level courses must be a science (e.g., 
BIO, GEO, PUBH, or SCI) course. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


EXERCISE SCIENCE 95 EXERCISE SCIENCE 


EXERCISE SCIENCE 

PROGRAM DIRECTOR: 

Timothy N. Harvey, M.S., A.T.C. 

FACULTY 

Assistant Professor: 

Timothy N. Harvey, M.S., A.T.C. 
Bradley R. Jacobson, M.A., A.T.C. 


Associate Professor: 

Robert Chetlin Ph.D., CSCS, CEP 

Instructors: 

Scott Michel, Ph.D., A.T.C. 

MISSION STATEMENT 

The mission and general objective of the Bachelor of Exercise Science major 
at Mercyhurst University is to provide students with the necessary didactic 
competencies, proficiencies and experiences both academically and 
clinically in order that they have the necessary requirements and 
background to sit for National Certification Examinations by either ACSM or 
NSCA. The curriculum in the Exercise Science major is designed to provide 
students with opportunities to increase their clinical skill set and 
professional acumen. The student will have every opportunity to fulfill all 
University and Department requirements toward graduation, and in so 
doing, will be exposed to the holistic liberal arts experience. This unique 
combination of the professional preparation and the holistic liberal arts 
experience will enable students to easily see the larger community picture 
and how the individual fits within this community to help create a caring 
and sustainable society. 

PROGRAM STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 

Demonstrate knowledge of patient pre-participation health screening, risk 
classification, and evaluation. 

Demonstrate knowledge of the benefits and risks associated with physical 
activity. 

Demonstrate knowledge of health related physical fitness testing, 
interpretation, and exercise prescription in the healthy populations. 

Demonstrate knowledge of behavioral theories and strategies for exercise 
and health promotion. 
Demonstrate proficiency in research methodology and scientific writing 

Students enrolled in any of the Pre-Health Concentrations within the Sports 
Medicine major are strongly encouraged to pursue a double major with 
Exercise Science, which is an employable degree. Refer to the Sports 
Medicine major for more details. 

ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS 

Freshman students must have a minimum GPA of 2.75 in high school plus a 

2.75 in each of the following six subjects: Algebra, Geometry, Trigonometry, 
Biology, Chemistry and Physics or General Science. Prior to entering their 
freshman year, it is recommended that exercise science majors complete the 
American Red Cross Professional Rescuer CPR/AED certification. 
TRANSFER/UNDECLARED STUDENTS 

A student transferring to Mercyhurst University can become eligible as a 
candidate for the Exercise Science program upon completion of the required 
academic courses. A transfer student with an Exercise Science related 
background may have specific Exercise Science courses waived by the 
Exercise Science Program Director. Additionally, the director of the Exercise 
Science program may grant exceptions to specific candidates if the student 
meets all other Exercise Science program admission requirements. In this 
case, students may be admitted provisionally into the Exercise Science 
program. Students admitted under these circumstances are granted a 
reprieve of one academic year to fulfill any remaining course requirements. 
Provisional students who complete all course requirements after this period 
will then be granted the opportunity to sit for the review board process. If 
all of the incoming Exercise Science courses are not waived, the student 
must successfully complete the courses before he/she may apply to the 
Exercise Science program. In addition to completing of the course 
requirements, it is recommended that the student have obtained 
observation hours under qualified Exercise Science professionals in 
appropriate Exercise Science venues. These hours can count toward the 
total required at the discretion of the Clinical Coordinator. Transfer students 
must appear before the Review Board at the end of their first year in the 
major and be accepted into the major prior to enrolling in upper level 
courses offered by the Sports Medicine Department. 

FINAL ACCEPTANCE REQUIREMENTS 

Students in Exercise Science must apply for formal acceptance into the major 
in spring of the Sophomore year, or after one academic year if a transfer 
student. Failure to do so results in automatic change of status to “premajor.” 
Achievement in the following areas will be necessary for success in 
the Exercise Science field according to guidelines provided by the American 
College of Sports Medicine, CoAES (Committee on Accreditation for the 
Exercise Sciences). Students must demonstrate academic success with an 
overall minimum GPA of 2.65, by having completed the minimum requisite 
observation hours, and submitting a completed and properly formatted 
portfolio. 

RESPONSIBILITY 

An above average level of responsible achievement within the major should 
be demonstrated. Evaluation of satisfactory achievement in this area will be 
determined by letters of recommendation, documentation of required 
shadow observation, and career portfolio. 

COOPERATION 

An above average level of teamwork with all members of the Exercise 
Science faculty and with fellow students should be achieved. Determination 
of satisfactory achievement in this area will be reflected in the 
recommendation letters. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


EXERCISE SCIENCE 
96 EXERCISE SCIENCE 


PROBLEM SOLVING/DECISION MAKING 

Applicants will demonstrate the ability to engage in all levels of critical 
thinking, including theoretical, practical, and clinical applications. 

CLINICAL PROFICENCY SKILLS 

Students pursuing Exercise Science will demonstrate proficiency in the 
acquisition and utilization of clinical skills and designated motor skills 
pertaining to care of the physically active population. Exercise Science 
students must complete all lab courses with a grade of “C” or higher. In 
addition to demonstrating clinical proficiency skills in lab courses, students 
will have additional opportunities to develop and apply their clinical skills. 
These additional opportunities include serving as a strength consultant to 
the Mercyhurst community in the junior and senior years, as well as a 
required Internship experience after the junior year. The Internship consists 
of a minimum 300 hours under the direction of a credentialed professional. 
The Internship is designed to provide students with a comprehensive clinical 
experience closely aligned with their prospective career choice. 

ACADEMIC 

Exercise Science majors must achieve and maintain an overall minimum QPA 
of 2.65. An overall QPA of 3.00 or higher is strongly recommended, should 
the student be interested in pursuing an advanced graduate degree. 

REVIEW BOARD 

The Review Board consists of three members from the Exercise Science 
academic and professional community. Deliberations of the Board take 
place at various times, depending upon individual student circumstances: 

(1) in the Spring semester of the student’s Sophomore year, or; (2) one year 
after the first academic year for transfer students, and; (3) at other times 
when the director deems necessary. 
EVALUATION PROCESS 

The Exercise Science student will have the opportunity to obtain a maximum 
of 300 points for the review board process. The 300 points consist of 100 
points for the GPA, 100 points for the Portfolio (which includes required 
observation hours), and 100 points for the Review Board interview. To 
successfully pass the review board process, the candidate must obtain a 
minimum of 225 points and achieve the minimum 2.65 GPA. If the 
candidate fails to meet the minimums a one-year probationary period may 
be offered under the following circumstances: 

1. 
The candidate’s GPA is lower than the 2.65, but no lower than 2.55 
combined with a Board score of no less than 240 points. 
2. 
The candidates Board score is less than the minimum 225 points, but 
no lower than 200 points combined with a GPA higher than 2.65. 
3. 
The candidate has the minimum points (225), has the minimum GPA 
of 2.65, but has not obtained the minimum number of observation 
hours 
Probation will last one academic year. The student must sit for the review 
process at the end of the probationary period and must have raised the 
deficient component to the minimum. If the student fails to pass the second 
review process, he/she will be dismissed from the Program. The 
probationary period will be from the time of the Review Board meeting until 

the first day of classes in the following fall semester (the candidate will have 
from the end of April to approximately Sept. 1 to obtain the necessary hours 
to reach the minimum 200 hours). 

It is required that students submit a completed Health Physical Form, 
immunization record, TB test, and proof of HBV vaccination to the University 
Health Center. Once accepted, the student must maintain a GPA of 2.65 or 
higher. If the QPA falls below 2.65, the student will be placed on probation. 
If a 2.65 or higher is not achieved at the end of the designated semester, the 
student will be dismissed from the Program. 

It is MOST strongly encouraged for all officially accepted students to become 
student members of ACSM and/or NSCA (annual student membership cost 
$80 per year for each). It is mandatory that all Exercise Science students 
achieve and maintain American Red Cross CPR-AED/First Aid certification 
throughout their tenure in the Exercise Science program*. 
*CPR cost approximately $40 every second year 
*First Aid cost approximately $40 every third year 

All freshmen and transfer students entering the Exercise Science major must 
show proof of passing the American Red Cross Professional Rescuer CPR/AED 
course prior to starting classes (freshmen are allowed to complete this 
requirement when they take EAIM in the freshman year). Accepted proof 
will be a certification card from the American Red Cross. 

APPEAL PROCESS 

Any student dismissed from the Exercise Science major may apply for re-
admittance to the program during the next session of the Review Board. 
The eligibility of the individual will be determined by the Board using the 
same criteria for accepting a new student into the program. Any student 
using the appeal process should contact the department chair one term 
prior to the review board session to initiate the process. 

NOTE: Students advised to discontinue the Exercise Science major are 
explicitly informed that a lateral move to a related science major may prove 
problematic, considering the high volume of completed credit hours 
required in related science fields. This is a risk that the student assumes 
when he or she accepts approved advancement into the Exercise Science 
major. 

GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS 

Students who have been accepted into the Exercise Science major must 
maintain an overall GPA of 2.65. This standard ensures necessary mastery of 
ACSM-CoAES KSA’s (Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities), and the domains and 
proficiencies of the NSCA. All required courses in the Exercise Science major 
must be completed, along with fulfillment of the student’s baccalaureate 
research project requirement by April 1 of the senior year. All Sports 
Medicine seniors are required to present their research proposals and 
findings in a university research symposium in the spring semester of the 
senior year, or, alternatively, at another professional seminar or symposium. 
Professional Rescuer CPR/AED certification or skill demonstration is required 
every 2 years after initial certification. No major course may be taken on a 
pass-fail basis and students who earn less than a “C” in any major course or 
lab must repeat the course or lab. Students who are not majors (including 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


EXERCISE SCIENCE 97 EXERCISE SCIENCE 


contract majors) may not enroll in courses offered by the Sports Medicine 
Department/Exercise Science faculty without written permission from the 
Department Chairperson and the program director. 

CLINICAL OBSERVATION REQUIREMENTS 

All Exercise Science majors are required to accrue 100 observation/clinical 
hours. The observation hours must be completed prior to review board. All 
Exercise Science majors are required to complete an internship with a 
minimum of 300 hours. This internship is usually completed in the summer 
between the junior and senior years, but can be completed during the 
academic year. In addition, all Exercise Science students must accrue 100 
hours serving as a strength consultant in their junior and senior years. 
Strength consultants work with the Mercyhurst community designing and 
implementing exercise programs to improve health and fitness for the 
general student population. 

CORE EXERCISE SCIENCE COURSES 

SPMD 155 Personal Health Science 
SPMD 157 Emergency Athletic Injury 3 credits 
Management 
MATH 139 Social Statistics 
SPMD 162 Intro to Sports Medicine 
SPMD 205/206 Exercise Assessment 1 & Lab 
SPMD 263 Nutrition for Health Professionals 
SPMD 305/306 Exercise Prescription & Lab 

SPMD 380 Exercise Physiology 
SPMD 381 Exercise Physiology/Lab 
SPMD 472 Pharmacology 
SPMD 480 Research Methods I 
SPMD 481 Research Methods II 
SPMD 483 Research Methods Lab 
SPMD 485 Exercise Science Practicum 

MINOR IN EXERCISE SCIENCE 

SPMD 162 Intro to Sports Medicine 
SPMD 205/206 Exercise Assessment I & Lab 4 credits 
BIO 240/241 ** Human Anatomy /Physiology I 

and Lab 
BIO 250/251 Human Anatomy /Physiology II and 
Lab 
SPMD 370/371 Strength Training & Program Design 

& Lab 
SPMD 380/381 Exercise Physiology and Lab 
** Prerequisite of BIO 120/121 or 130/131 
AND Elective Courses 

Elective Courses: 

Students who wish to complete a minor in Exercise Science must choose 3 
additional courses from the Sports Medicine Department offerings. Please 
keep in mind the prerequisite required for some courses. 

CLINICAL OBSERVATION REQUIREMENTS 

50 hours of documented observation with Exercise Science professionals 
who hold any ACSM (American College of Sports Medicine) credential, or 
professionals who hold the NSCA-CSCS (National Strength Conditioning 
Association – Certified Strength Coach Specialist) credential. 

ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS 

The minor student must have written approval from the Sports Medicine 
department chairperson and the Undergraduate Exercise Science program 
director. The student must have a minimum 2.65 GPA and this must be 
maintained. Application for this minor should occur in the sophomore year. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Fashion Merchandising 
98 Fashion Merchandising 

Fashion Merchandising 
DEPARTMENT CHAIR 


Amy Weaver-Kaulis, M.S. 

FACULTY 

Assistant Professor: 

Amy Weaver-Kaulis, M.S. 

Instructors: 

Erin Magorien, M.S. 

Jennifer Craven, M.S. 

INTRODUCTION 

The role of fashion merchandisers is to plan, develop and present product 
lines. To that end, the fashion department at Mercyhurst University provides 
a broad range of both career and learning opportunities. The fashion 
industry is one of the most diverse areas of study. The Fashion 
Merchandising Studies at Mercyhurst are unique in that we focus on three 
basic categories of study: 1) the individual person, 2) the product, and 3) the 
industry itself. Fashion studies concentrate on integrating knowledge in the 
areas of: human needs, industry trends and anticipation, product line 
development, textiles, production, sourcing, assessment of performance 
criteria, advertising, and public relations. 

Students graduating in Fashion Merchandising pursue careers as fashion 
buyers, allocations analysts, corporate account executives, fashion writers 
and editors, as marketing specialists, product line developers, forecasters, 
technical designers, human resource directors, entrepreneurs, and 
educators. 

MISSION STATEMENT 

The B.S. degree in Fashion Merchandising at Mercyhurst University is 
designed to prepare students for professional careers or graduate education 
in the textile and apparel industries. Our program provides students with 
the opportunity to develop conceptual and creative abilities in relation to 
the individual person, the product, and the industry itself. It is our mission 
to prepare students by providing teaching excellence in a curriculum that 
advances creativity, global awareness and current business practices. 

PROGRAM STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 

The Fashion Merchandising faculty has collaboratively developed seven 
broad-based learning outcomes that serve as the foundation and guiding 
force behind our program’s curriculum. 

Upon completion of the Fashion Merchandising program, graduates will be 
able to: 

1. 
Demonstrate data gathering, synthesis, problem solving and 
decision making. 
2. 
Demonstrate written and oral presentation skills appropriate to 
the field of fashion. 
3. 
Identify the manner in which historic, cultural and cyclical 
environmental factors impact the fashion industry. 
4. 
Distinguish the intrinsic and extrinsic characteristics of all 
segments within the textile complex, following the progression 
from fibers to end products. 
5. 
Demonstrate basic planning, production, promotion, and 
distribution techniques for the men’s, women’s and children’s 
wear markets. 
6. 
Demonstrate knowledge of mathematical concepts and financial 
statements related to merchandise buying and planning. 
7. 
Identify the variety of career opportunities within the fashion 
industry, the inter-relationships between them, and the 
methods to gain entry therein. 
UNIQUE FEATURES 

An important component of our studies is the inclusion of an internship 
experience. Students are required to intern after the sophomore or junior 
year and provide documentation of their fashion-related work experience. 
They are encouraged to seek an internship in fashion centers. 

Students have the option of enrolling in the visiting students program at 
The Fashion Institute of Technology (F.I.T.) in New York City, during their 
junior or senior year. Criteria and acceptance are the sole purview of F.I.T. 
and courses must be taken exactly as listed in the F.I.T. catalog. Students 
may also elect to remain at Mercyhurst University for the full four years. The 
Fashion Institute of Technology is a fully accredited educational institution 
offering programs in a variety of areas including, but not limited to, Fashion 
Merchandising. F.I.T. sponsors a visiting students program that allows 
students from other schools throughout the United States to study for a full 
year, an opportunity that provides excellent social, cultural, and professional 
advantages. Students have options as to areas of study and graduate with 
an associate degree from F.I.T. in addition to their Bachelor of Science 
degree from Mercyhurst. Students are encouraged to participate in this 
option given the networking and internship opportunities that abound in 
New York City. We feel that the rigor of Mercyhurst, combined with the New 
York City experience, is the optimal opportunity for our students. A 
cumulative G.P.A. of 3.0 is required for application to F.I.T., however, 
applying does not guarantee acceptance. Application must be sent by Jan. 1 
the year prior to attendance. 

INTERNATIONAL STUDIES 

Fashion students are encouraged to travel and study abroad. The program 
offers a trip each academic year. In the odd years, a trip to the New York City 
Garment District is taken. Students visit corporate headquarters of 
designers, publishers, trade organizations, print houses, forecasters, etc. In 
the even years an international trip is offered. To date faculty/student trips 
have gone to: Paris, Milan/Venice, London and Hong Kong. International 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Fashion Merchandising 99 Fashion Merchandising 

fashion trips provide university credits. In addition, Mercyhurst’s 
International Study Abroad Office coordinates full summers/semesters of 
study abroad; to date, students have studied in Paris, London and Florence. 

SOPHOMORE REVIEW 

Students file a formal application for acceptance into the Fashion 
Merchandising Program during their sophomore year and are evaluated by 
the Fashion Merchandising faculty. Formal acceptance is contingent upon 
the following criteria: (1) a minimum 2.5 G.P.A. (2) completion of realistic 
and well-defined short and long-term career goals; (3) evidence of ongoing 
fashion-related work experience. 

GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS 

In order to graduate with a degree in Fashion Merchandising from 
Mercyhurst University, students are required to: (1) have a GPA of 2.5, (2) 
participate in a senior exit interview with the department chairperson. 

REQUIRED COURSES 

FASH 100 Public Speaking in the Fashion Industry 2 credits 
FASH 110 Introduction to the Fashion Industry 3 credits 
FASH 120 Personal Styling Analysis 3 credits 
FASH 130 Introduction to Fashion Construction 3 credits 
FASH 230 Fashion Branding 3 credits 
FASH 330 Textiles for Apparel 3 credits 
FASH 360 Merchandise Planning and Control 3 credits 
FASH 400 Professional Development 2 credits 
FASH 450 Product Line Development 3 credits 
FASH 475 Fashion Merchandising Internship 3 credits 

In addition to the required courses above, students must take four 
additional elective courses of their choice. 

ELECTIVE COURSES: 

FASH 240 Global Trends In Fashion 3 credits 
FASH 260 Fashion Journalism 3 credits 
FASH 310 Menswear 3 credits 
FASH 370 Fashion Entrepreneurship 3 credits 
FASH 410 Fashion Evolution 3 credits 
FASH 430 Visual Merchandising 3 credits 

A cumulative G.P.A. of 2.5 for all courses listed is required for graduation. No 
course may be taken pass/fail. All courses must be completed to a "C" level. 

MINOR PROGRAM 

The Fashion Studies minor is offered to non-majors. A requirement of 2.5 
remains the standard. No courses may be taken as pass/fail. Fashion Studies 
minors are required to complete a total of six courses (17-18 credits). The 
following two foundation courses are required: 

FASH 110 Introduction to the Fashion Industry 3 credits 
FASH 120 Personal Styling Analysis 3 credits 

Choose four more courses from those listed below: 

FASH 100 Public Speaking in the Fashion Industry 2 credits 
FASH 130 Introduction to Fashion Construction 3 credits 
FASH 230 Fashion Branding 3 credits 
FASH 240 Global Trends In Fashion 3 credits 
FASH 260 Fashion Journalism 3 credits 
FASH 330 Textiles for Apparel 3 credits 
FASH 310 Menswear 3 credits 
FASH 360 Merchandise Planning and Control 3 credits 
FASH 370 Fashion Entrepreneurship 3 credits 
FASH 400 Professional Development 2 credits 
FASH 410 Fashion Evolution 3 credits 
FASH 430 Visual Merchandising 3 credits 
FASH 450 Product Line Development 3 credits 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


GENDER STUDIES 100 GENDER STUDIES 


GENDER STUDIES 
INTERDISCIPLINARY MINOR 


PROGRAM DIRECTOR 
Ruth Jolie, Ph.D 


INTRODUCTION 

Housed in the Departments of Anthropology, Applied Sociology, and 
Psychology, the Gender Studies minor provides students with the 
opportunity to learn about the subject of gender through a multidisciplinary 
encounter. This minor facilitates formal discourse involving issues such as 
the negotiation of power, identities and social reproduction. It further 
recognizes the university’s special history of empowering women, offering 
engendered programs of learning, and promoting a well-balanced 
environment of study through academics and service learning. 

The study of gender and related issues promotes cultural competency in a 
wide variety of workplace, academic, and domestic settings. Through an 
appreciation of gender differences, roles, and historic interactions in a 
variety of contexts, students enhance their ability to function in the 
workplace and at home through the fostering of better interpersonal 
relationships and communication. 

Interested students should contact Dr. Ruth Jolie for further information. 

REQUIRED COURSES 

ANTH 125 Introduction to Gender Studies 3 credits 
PSYCH 265 Psychology of Gender 3 credits 
*Students must also complete 5 approved elective courses from across 
the Mercyhurst University Curriculum, no more than 2 from one 
department. 

ELECTIVE COURSES 
ANTH 227 Ethnographic Field Methods *with 3 credits 
approval by instructor 
ANTH 346 Anthropology of Gender 3 credits 
ANTH 349 Anthropology of the Family 3 credits 
CRJS 335 Seminar: Women in Crime 3 credits 
ENGL 374 Women and Literature 3 credits 
FREN 135 Topics in French Literature: Gender 3 credits 
FREN 305 Seminar: Gender 3 credits 
HIST 280 Gendering World History I 3 credits 
HIST 281 Gendering World History II 3 credits 
HIST/CRJS 382 Seminar: Crime, Gender and Violence in 3 credits 
the Modern World 
RLST 176 Feminist Theologies 3 credits 
RLST 255 Religious Perspectives on Human 3 credits 
Relationships 
RLST 270 Women in Scripture 3 credits 
SOC 204 Diversity in Society 3 credits 
SPAN 305 Seminar: Gender in Hispanic Civilization 3 credits 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


GEOLOGY 101 GEOLOGY 


GEOLOGY 

DEPARTMENT CHAIR 

Nicholas P. Lang, Ph.D. 

FACULTY 

Professor: 

M. Raymond Buyce, Ph.D., 
Director of Geoarchaeological Research 
Associate Professors 

Nicholas P. Lang, Ph.D 

Assistant Professors 

Scott McKenzie, B.S. 

INTRODUCTION 

Students majoring in Geology will be preparing themselves to take an active 
role in the utilization of the earth’s resources while protecting its fragile 
environment. Course work involves hands-on use of modern laboratory 
equipment and extensive projects out in the field. The faculty combine the 
use of small class sizes and abundant travel opportunities with a 
commitment to involving students in ongoing geological projects that 
involve both local and far-ranging locales. Locally the emphasis is on the ice 
age deposits and modern coastal processes on the shores of Lake Erie, the 
folded sedimentary rocks of the Appalachian Mountains, and the igneous 
and metamorphic rocks of nearby Canada. Far-ranging projects include work 
with soils from the American southwest, igneous rocks from Nevada and 
Arizona, beaver pond sediments from Yellowstone National Park, describing 
vertebrate and invertebrate fossil remains, and planetary mapping of Mars 
and Venus. 

MISSION STATEMENT 

Geology is the science of the Earth—how it was made, what comprises it, 
and how it operates. These are all concepts critical to understand in order to 
survive on this Earth and to be responsible and successful stewards of the 
resources we harvest from it. In essence, geology touches on the most 
fundamental of concepts that are often times overlooked, but are required 
to know in order to be able to live in a sustainable fashion on our home 
planet. Without an understanding of geology, there would be a populace 
who would not understand the fine line between humans and the Earth. 
Specifically, events such as flooding, earthquakes, and landslides (events 
that affect humans with negative consequences on an everyday basis) could 
not be addressed and mitigated without the knowledge of geology; nor 
could the necessary and responsible extraction and management of natural 
resources from the Earth happen without knowledge of how and where they 
occur. Hence, the mission of the Mercyhurst University Geology Department 
is to educate and train students in the Earth Sciences so that they are 
reflectively aware of the natural environment in which they live and are 

globally responsible of the Earth and its resources. Central in this mission is 
a commitment to experiential learning through rigorous laboratory 
exercises, hands-on field experiences, participation in faculty-student 
collaborative research projects and travel courses, and the opportunity to 
attend and participate in professional conferences. 

LEARNING OUTCOMES 

The Geology Department has identified eight broad learning outcomes that 
all geology majors should meet before they earn their degree. Upon 
completion of the Geology curriculum, a geology major should be able to: 

Explain the paradigms that shape current geologic thought (e.g., plate 
tectonics). 

Explain the concept of geologic time and detail the geologic time scale for 
the Earth. 

Explain the processes that have shaped and continue to shape the Earth. 

Identify significant geologic features on the Earth and place them into their 
appropriate geologic context. 

Identify common rocks and minerals found on and inside the Earth using 
hand samples and thin sections. 

Associate common rocks and minerals found on and inside the Earth with 
their appropriate geologic context. 

Formulate and communicate an effective scientific argument through 
written and oral means. 

Demonstrate the ability to organize and conduct geology-related field and 
laboratory work. 

The curricula are designed with three primary objectives: (1) to prepare 
students for entry level employment with consulting and engineering 
companies that concentrate on environmental problems, (2) to prepare 
students for entry level employment in federal, state, and municipal 
environmental agencies, (3) to prepare students who enter graduate 
programs in the branch of geology of their choosing in preparation for 
university teaching or upper level employment with private companies or 
governmental agencies. Many of our graduates have secured entry-level 
positions in the government and private sectors upon graduation; many 
other graduates from the Mercyhurst geology program have secured full-
ride funding from a variety of graduate programs. Thus, we believe our 
curriculum prepares our students well for a geology career after Mercyhurst. 

The Department of Geology also maintains special relationships with the 
Environmental Science program as well as the Department of Anthropology 
and Archaeology. Students with interests in geology and either of these two 
programs are strongly encouraged to participate in joint activities between 
the programs and to discuss possible crossover opportunities. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


GEOLOGY 102 GEOLOGY 


GEOLOGY REQUIREMENTS 

The Department of Geology offers courses leading to Bachelor of Arts (B.A.) 
or Bachelor of Science (B.S.) degree in Geology. Students seeking a degree in 
Geology are required to take core Geology courses plus two additional 
electives. Students must also complete a senior capstone project, which 
requires four courses. These are an additional 6 cognate courses in math, 
physics, and chemistry. The required coursework in these subjects depends 
on whether a student pursues a B.A. or B.S. degree. Students who expect to 
attend graduate school after graduation are strongly encouraged to pursue 
the B.S. degree. 

To be recommended for graduation, students must earn at least a 2.5 GPA in 
their Geology courses and earn a grade of at least C in any Geology class 
completed to fulfill a degree requirement. Students must earn at least a 
grade of D in each cognate. 

Students have the option of completing a concentration in Geoarchaeology, 
Planetary Geology, Paleontology, Environmental Geology, or Earth and 
Space Science Education. Earth and Space Science Education is designed for 
students seeking an Earth and Space Science certification and M.S. in 
secondary Education via Mercyhurst's 4+1 master's program in secondary 
education. The other concentrations take advantage of the specialized 
research strengths, facilities and course offerings available at Mercyhurst. 
These concentrations typically require four to five courses in addition to the 
regular geology major curriculum and are designed to provide the student 
with a more in-depth understanding of a specific aspect of geology. 
Although an area of concentration is not required as part of the geology 
major, the concentrations do provide students an avenue to become more 
specialized in an area of geology, which could make them more competitive 
for graduate school and/or future employment in that area. 

GEOLOGY MAJOR CORE COURSES 

GEOL 100 Physical Geology 3 credits 
GEOL 102 Physical Geology Lab 1 credit 
GEOL 110 Historical Geology 3 credits 
GEOL 111 Historical Geology Lab 1 credit 
GEOL 211 Mineralogy 3 credits 
GEOL 212 Mineralogy Lab 1 credit 
GEOL 213 Petrology 3 credits 
GEOL 214 Petrology Lab 1 credit 
GEOL 215 Geomorphology 3 credits 
GEOL 216 Geomorphology Lab 1 credit 
GEOL 342 Sedimentology & Stratigraphy 3 credits 
GEOL 343 Sedimentology & Stratigraphy Lab 1 credit 
GEOL 250 Structural Geology 3 credits 
GEOL 251 Structural Geology Lab 1 credit 

Plus two additional geology elective courses numbered 200 or above. It is 
strongly recommended that students interested in Geoarchaeology for 
graduate studies and/or a career, take both GEOL 215/216 and GEOL 
430/431. Students considering graduate school are strongly recommended 
to pursue the B.S. degree. 

GEOLOGY MAJOR CAPSTONE COURSES 

Before registering for Capstone courses students must complete GEOL 100 
and GEOL 102 and get permission of the instructor. 

GEOL 255 Field Methods in Geology 4 credits 
OR Approved Field School 3 credits 
GEOL 410 Seminar and Research 1-4 credits 
GEOL 490 Senior Thesis 3 credits 

* ANTH 390 Research & Design may be substituted for GEOL 410 
GEOLOGY MAJOR ELECTIVE COURSES 

GEOL 205 Cities on Volcanoes 3 credits 
GEOL 206 Cities on Volcanoes Lab 1 credit 
GEOL 225 Science on Display 3 credits 
GEOL 226 Science on Display Lab 1 credit 
GEOL 235 Paleoclimatology 3 credits 
GEOL 236 Paleoclimatology Lab 1 credit 
GEOL 240 Paleontology 3 credits 
GEOL 241 Paleontology Lab 1 credit 
GEOL 260 Hydrogeology 3 credits 
GEOL 261 Hydrogeology Lab 1 credit 
GEOL 306 Soils 3 credits 
GEOL 307 Soils Lab 1 credit 
GEOL 370/ Dendrochronology 3 credits 
ANTH 370 
GEOL 380 Principles of Remote Sensing 3 credits 
GEOL 381 Principles of Remote Sensing Lab 1 credit 
GEOL 430/ Geoarchaeology 3 credits 
ANTH 430 
GEOL 431 Geoarchaeology Lab 1 credit 
GEOL 440 Introduction to GIS 3 credits 
GEOL 441 Introduction to GIS Lab 1 credit 
SCI 225 Oceanography 4 credits 

Subject to department chair approval, one course numbered 200 or above in 
mathematics/computer systems or the natural sciences may count as one 
geology elective course. Students pursuing the Earth and Space Science 
concentration may count either SCI 118/119 Astronomy & Lab or GEOL 
112/113 Voyages to the Terrestrial Planets & Lab as one of their two elective 
Geology courses. 

B.A. COGNATE COURSES 
MATH 118 Mathematics for the Natural Sciences 4 credits 
CHEM 121 General Chemistry I 3 credits 
CHEM 122 General Chemistry I Lab 1 credit 
CHEM 131 General Chemistry II 3 credits 
CHEM 132 General Chemistry II Lab 1 credit 
PHYS 101 Principles of Physics I 3 credits 
PHYS 103 Principles of Physics I Lab 1 credit 

Plus one additional math course and either PHYS 102/106 or an additional 
course in mathematics/computer systems or the natural sciences. For the 

B.A. degree in geology, an additional course in the natural sciences or 
2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


GEOLOGY 103 GEOLOGY 


computer systems may be substituted for CHEM 131/132. Subject to 
department chair approval. 

B.S. COGNATE COURSES 
MATH 170 Calculus I 4 credits 
CHEM 121 General Chemistry I 3 credits 
CHEM 122 General Chemistry I Lab 1 credit 
CHEM 131 General Chemistry II 3 credits 
CHEM 132 General Chemistry II Lab 1 credit 
PHYS 101 Principles of Physics I 3 credits 
PHYS 103 Principles of Physics I Lab 1 credit 

Plus one additional math course beyond MATH 118 and either PHYS 
102/106 or an additional course in mathematics/computer systems or 
natural sciences. Subject to department chair approval. Students 
considering graduate school are strongly encouraged to take MATH 171 
Calculus II. 

GEOLOGY MINOR 

GEOL 100 Physical Geology 3 credits 
GEOL 102 Physical Geology Lab 1 credit 
Plus four additional geology courses with at least three numbered 200 or 
higher; SCI 225 Oceanography may count towards the geology minor. 

GEOARCHAEOLOGY CONCENTRATION 

GEOL 306 Soils 3 credits 
GEOL 307 Soils Lab 1 credit 
GEOL 430/ Geoarchaeology 3 credits 
ANTH 430 
GEOL 431/ Geoarchaeology Lab 1 credit 
ANTH 431 
ANTH 130 Archaeology 3 credits 
ANTH 131 Archaeology Lab 1 credit 
ANTH 224 Archaeological Field Methods 3 credits 
ANTH 225 Archaeological Field Methods Lab 1 credit 

PALEONTOLOGY CONCENTRATION 

GEOL 240 Paleontology 3 credits 
GEOL 241 Paleontology Lab 1 credit 
BIO 144 Ecology and Evolutionary Biology 3 credits 
BIO 145 Ecology and Evolutionary Biology Lab 1 credit 

MATH 139 Statistics for the Sciences 3 credits 
AND two of the following courses: 
BIO 148/149 Organismal Biology & Lab 4 credits 
BIO 320/321 Comparative Vertebrate Anatomy & Lab 4 credits 

BIO 230/231 Invertebrate Zoology & Lab 4 credits 
BIO 374 Evolution 3 credits 
CHEM 240/241 Organic Chemistry 1/Lab 4 credits 

Depending upon university-wide offerings and department chair approval, 
an alternative statistics-themed course may be substituted for MATH 139 
Statistics for the Sciences. 

PLANETARY GEOLOGY CONCENTRATION 

GEOL 112 Voyages to the Terrestrial Planets 3 credits 
GEOL 113 Voyages to the Terrestrial Planets Lab 1 credit 
GEOL 380 Principles of Remote Sensing 3 credits 
GEOL 381 Principles of Remote Sensing Lab 1 credit 
GEOL 440 Introduction to GIS 3 credits 
GEOL 441 Introduction to GIS Lab 1 credit 

Plus one additional climate-themed course that is subject to department 
chair approval. Students pursuing a planetary geology concentration cannot 
also concurrently pursue a planetary science minor. 

EARTH AND SPACE SCIENCE EDUCATION CONCENTRATION 

SCI 225 Oceanography 4 credits 
SCI 118 Astronomy 3 credits 
SCI119 Astronomy Lab 1 credit 
OR 
GEOL 112 Voyages to the Terrestrial Planets 3 credits 
GEOL 113 Voyages to the Terrestrial Planets Lab 1 credit 

BIO 146 Ecology and Evolutionary Biology of 3 credits 
Organisms 
BIO 146 Ecology and Evolutionary Biology of 1 credit 
Organisms Lab 

Plus one additional meteorology or climatology-themed course that is 
subject to department chair approval. Either SCI 118/119 Astronomy/Lab 
OR GEOL 112/113 Voyages to the Terrestrial Planets/Lab may be taken as 
part of this concentration. 

ENVIRONMENTAL GEOLOGY CONCENTRATION 

GEOL 306/307 Soils/Lab 4 credits 
GEOL 260/261 Hydrogeology/Lab 4 credits 
GEOL 288 Energy and Environmental Justice 3 credits 
GEOL 440/441 Introduction to GIS/Lab 4 credits 

Plus either PUBH 201 Environmental Health or a climate-themed course that 
is subject to department chair approval. Students pursuing an 
environmental geology concentration cannot also concurrently pursue an 
environmental science major or minor. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


History 104 History 

History 

DEPARTMENT CHAIR 

John Olszowka, Ph.D. 

FACULTY 

Professors: 

Randall Howarth, Ph.D. 
Chris J. Magoc, Ph.D. 


Associate Professor: 

John Olszowka, Ph.D. 

Assistant Professors: 

Benjamin G. Scharff, Ph.D 

INTRODUCTION 

The Department of History helps its students develop as creative problem 
solvers as well as critical thinkers and evaluators of contemporary life 
through the study of history. A premium is placed on effective written and 
oral communication. Research skills, the basic tools of many rewarding 
careers, are the focus of our program’s senior thesis and senior seminar in 
history. Majors are prepared upon graduation to assume future challenges in 
law, public service, business, and many other professional fields. 

Students who meet the criteria will be invited to join Phi Alpha Theta, a 
nationally recognized history honor society. History students are encouraged 
to join the Model United Nations club on campus, which offers the 
opportunity to participate in intercollegiate historical simulations. 

The History Club provides opportunities for extracurricular trips, 
film/discussion events and other history-related activities. 

MISSION STATEMENT 

The mission of the Mercyhurst University History Department begins with 
the engagement of all students in the infinitely rewarding study of past 
human societies and cultures—the foundational premise of History’s 
central place in the Liberal Arts curriculum. We aim continuously to 
strengthen students’ abilities to conduct primary and secondary source 
research, to analyze and weigh evidence, and to articulate sound 
conclusions and arguments both orally and in writing. Through courses 
that extend chronologically and thematically from the ancient world to 
contemporary societies and cultures, Mercyhurst History majors acquire 
knowledge and critical thinking skills that cultivate their development as 
informed, engaged, and thoughtful citizens. Our graduates are prepared to 
pursue successful careers as teachers, researchers, writers and journalists, 
attorneys, non-profit or public service professionals, historians in both the 
public and private sectors, among many other career tracks. 

To advance this mission, the curriculum of the Mercyhurst History 
Department emphasizes thorough and ongoing study of primary sources 
and the secondary-source interpretations of a wide range of scholars. 
Through extensive writing and discussion opportunities in virtually every 
course, students are challenged to develop the historical habits of mind that 
will provide them with personal enrichment, equip them to better 
understand the complex world in which they live, and to sustain throughout 
their lives the spirit of inquiry, curiosity and civic engagement that lies at the 
heart of the discipline of history. 

PROGRAM STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 

Critical Thinking. Students will demonstrate an ability to consider, and 
determine a position on, an historical problem critically: stating the issue 
clearly, recognizing, questioning and evaluating their own assumptions, and 
identifying and assessing the relevant interpretations and arguments of 
scholars on the problem. They will master the ability to examine critically 
the rhetoric, bias and motivation of primary source accounts, understanding 
the critical importance of historical context and audience. Finally, students 
will be able to present, evaluate, and analyze appropriate supporting 
evidence and use it effectively in arguing a reasoned conclusion. 

Historical Knowledge and Understanding. Students will demonstrate a 
broad understanding of the general characteristics and key developments of 
major periods of United States, European and non-western history 
(embracing their intellectual, economic, social, cultural, and political 
dimensions), and a more fully developed and detailed comprehension of 
one major area of historical study. They will also exhibit an understanding 
of historiography, and the shifting schools of thought on one particular area 
of history. 

Information Literacy. Students will demonstrate proficiency working with 
historical sources of information, including: design and refine a research 
strategy appropriate to a research problem; identify and locate a range of 
primary and secondary sources; organize, synthesize and incorporate a 
range of materials to advance an historical argument they have developed; 
employ the professional standards and practices of the historian—proper 
use of citation and references, paraphrasing, quoting and summarizing, and 
thorough contextualizing of primary source material 

Communication. Students will demonstrate proficiency and maximum 
fluency in communicating historical knowledge and arguments orally and in 
writing. They will employ a range of high quality, relevant primary and 
secondary sources to advance their ideas; organize their ideas clearly and 
methodically; use appropriate stylistic presentation and format for historical 
writing; and keep grammatical and syntax errors to an absolute minimum. 

Intercultural Historical Knowledge and Understanding and Civic 
Engagement. Students will demonstrate an understanding of the cultural 
construction of race, gender, ethnicity and nature in history, a historically 
well-informed cultural self-awareness, and a related understanding of the 
elements that shape other peoples’ history, cultural beliefs and practices, 
economic and political systems, as well as their relationships with other 
peoples and nation-states. An empathy-based historical sensibility and 
knowledge base should move them to ask complex questions about other 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


History 105 History 
cultures that transcend time and place. Further, students will exhibit a well-HIS 224 Vietnam War 3 credits 
developed understanding of how dominant perspectives in a society shape HIS 225 Expl Amer Cult 1920-Present 3 credits 
social authority and patterns of power, as well as of the historical evolution HIS 230 History Of American West 3 credits 
of American democracy in a comparative perspective relative to the HIS 232 African Americans in Film 3 credits 
expressions of ideals and practices in other countries. Students will HIS 235 Intro to Public History Museum Studies 3 credits 
demonstrate a capacity to exchange ideas about civic engagement in ways HIS 236 Intro to Historic Preservation 3 credits 
that draws on others’ viewpoints. HIS 240 Museum Studies II 3 credits 
HIS 305 American Material Culture/Built Landscape 3 credits 
The Value of Material Evidence. Students will demonstrate essential HIS 316 Labor and Working Class America 3 credits 
knowledge of material culture scholarship, and be able to identify and HIS 325 America in the Nuclear Age 3 credits 
classify artifacts and landscapes according to their thematic, physical, HIS 326 The Turbulent Sixties 3 credits 
geographical and chronological contexts, and to communicate knowledge HIS 327 The Civil Rights Movement 3 credits 
and assessments effectively both through oral presentation and through HIS391 Special Topics in American History 3 credits 
written analysis. 
Minimum 6 credits European History 
Public History Theory, Methods, Ethics, and Technical Practice. Students HIS 145 Europe History To Renaissance 3 credits 
will exhibit an essential understanding of the many dimensions of HIS 146 Europe History Since Renaissance 3 credits 
collecting, preserving and interpreting history for the public; the HIS 219 World War II 3 credits 
development of public history in relation to the historical profession as a HIS 245 Ancient Greece 3 credits 
whole; key theories, research methods, technical practices and ethical HIS 246 Ancient Rome 3 credits 
standards of at least one track in public history (e.g., museums, historic HIS 247 Medieval Europe 3 credits 
preservation); enduring and critical issues associated with the practice of HIS 271 Imperial Russia 3 credits 
public history. Students will also demonstrate the ability to engage in the HIS 272 Soviet Russia 3 credits 
practice of public history and to undertake a public history project, either HIS 345 Ancient Greek & Roman History Writers 3 credits 
individually or as members of a team. HIS 346 Famous Greeks & Romans 3 credits 
HIS 347 Women in the Ancient & Medieval World 3 credits 
Students must maintain an overall GPA of 2.5 and a 2.75 GPA in major HIS 348 Ancient & Medieval Warfare 3 credits 
courses to be certified for graduation as a History major or minor. No major HIS 352 Anti-Semitism Before Holocaust 3 credits 
course may be taken on a pass-fail basis. Additionally, students who fail to HIS 371 Russian Film 3 credits 
earn a grade of C or better in a major course may not count it toward the HIS 383 Hitler & Stalin 3 credits 
major. Student progress will be monitored in an annual review. Students HIS 392 Special Topics in European History 3 credits 
whose performance is unsatisfactory are placed on probation or are dropped 
from the major, depending on the outcome of the review. Minimum 6 credits World History 
HIS 170 Wrld His I: Agr To Zheng He 3 credits 
HISTORY MAJOR (42 credit hours) HIS 171 Wrld His Ii: Explr-Atomic 3 credits 
Required Courses HIS 175 World Geography 3 credits 
HIS 301 Historical Methods/Historiography 3 credits HIS 205 History of the Modern Far East 3 credits 
HIS 480 Senior Seminar 3 credits HIS 270 20th Century World History 3 credits 
OR HIS 273 Ancient Near East 3 credits 
HIS 490 Senior Thesis 3 credits HIS 274 Modern Middle East 3 credits 
Six additional History Courses 18 credits HIS 275 History of Central Asia 3 credits 
HIS 280 Gendering World History I: Sex/Power 3 credits 
Minimum 6 credits U.S. History Ancient World 
HIS 101 US History To 1865 3 credits HIS 281 Gendering World History II: Sex/Power 3 credits 
HIS 102 US History Since 1865 3 credits Modern World 
HIS 211 Colonial America 3 credits HIS 370 Ancient History and Modern Media 3 credits 
HIS 212 Revolutionary America 3 credits HIS 372 Modern Empire/Gender/Power & Film 3 credits 
HIS 213 Early Republican America 3 credits HIS 380 Empire & Imperialism I: Ancient World 3 credits 
HIS 214 Pennsylvania History 3 credits HIS 381 Empire & Imperialism II: Modern World 3 credits 
HIS 216 Civil War & Reconstruction 3 credits HIS 382 Crime & Violence in Modern World 3 credits 
HIS 217 Making Modern America 1877-1920 3 credits HIS 393 Special Topics in World History 3 credits 
HIS 218 3 credits 
HIS 220 America Since 1945 3 credits 
HIS 221 US Environmental History 3 credits 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


History 106 History 
HISTORY AND PUBLIC HISTORY CONCENTRATION 
The department offers a Public History concentration. It is designed for 
students interested in the growing field of public history, including 
museums and historic sites, historical societies, heritage preservation and 
When student teaching in the region, Mercyhurst social studies students are 
universally praised for the high caliber preparation they have received in our 
classrooms. Following graduation, our Social Studies Education majors have 
long enjoyed a remarkably high success rate in securing teaching positions. 

tourism, archival collections, folklore and oral history, business and labor 
history, and historic preservation. In addition to their core history courses 
and other electives, students in the program take courses specifically 
designed to prepare them for either entry-level positions in public history or 
graduate training in the field. An internship with a museum, historical 
society or historic site is required, providing the student with initial 
experience in the field. The required senior project provides students an 
opportunity to produce a substantive and publishable work of public history 
scholarship. 

PUBLIC HISTORY CONCENTRATION (42 Credit Hours) 
Required Courses 

HIS 235 Introduction to Public History/Museum 3 credits 
Studies 
HIS 236 Introduction to Historic Preservation 3 credits 
HIS 240 Museum Studies II 3 credits 
HIS 305 American Material Culture/Built Landscape 3 credits 
HIS 301 Historical Methods and Historiography 3 credits 
HIS 475 Public History Internship 3 credits 
HIS 485 Senior Project in Public History 3 credits 
Select one additional course from the following: 
HIS 394 Special Topics in Public History 3 credits 
ANTH 205 Historical Archaeology 3 credits 
ANTH 227 Ethnographic Field Methods 3 credits 
ART 128 Computer Design for Non-Designers 3 credits. 
OR 
ART 220 Introduction to Graphic Design 3 credits 
COMM 402 Documentary Film Production 3 credits 
BADM 455 Special Topics: Grant Writing 3 credits 

Students will take a minimum of 6 additional history courses (18 credits): at 
least 2 American, 2 European, and 2 World History. 

HISTORY MINOR 

Choose six courses total (18 credit hours), no more than two of which may 
be at the 100 introductory level. No courses taken as part of the History 
Minor may be credited on a Pass/Fail basis. 

SOCIAL STUDIES EDUCATION CERTIFICATION PROGRAM: 4 -YEAR 
OPTION 

This program enables students to graduate as a History major and to attain 
their Pennsylvania teacher certification in Social Studies within a 4-year 
period becoming certified to teach history and other social studies subjects 
at the high school level. Students must maintain a 3.0 GPA or better 
throughout the program as mandated by the Pennsylvania Department of 
Education, pass the required PRAXIS Exams, and also secure the necessary 
state and national clearances as outlined in the Education Department 
section of this catalog. 

REQUIRED HISTORY CURRICULUM (33 credits) 
Minimum 6 credits U.S. History 

HIS 101 US History To 1865 3 credits 
HIS 102 US History Since 1865 3 credits 
HIS 211 Colonial America 3 credits 
HIS 212 Revolutionary America 3 credits 
HIS 213 Early Republican America 3 credits 
HIS 214 Pennsylvania History 3 credits 
HIS 216 Civil War & Reconstruction 3 credits 
HIS 217 Making Modern America 1877-1920 3 credits 
HIS 218 3 credits 
HIS 220 America Since 1945 3 credits 
HIS 221 US Environmental History 3 credits 
HIS 224 Vietnam War 3 credits 
HIS 225 Expl Amer Cult 1920-Present 3 credits 
HIS 230 History Of American West 3 credits 
HIS 232 African Americans in Film 3 credits 
HIS 235 Intro to Public History Museum Studies 3 credits 
HIS 236 Intro to Historic Preservation 3 credits 
HIS 240 Museum Studies II 3 credits 
HIS 305 American Material Culture/Built Landscape 3 credits 
HIS 316 Labor and Working Class America 3 credits 
HIS 325 America in the Nuclear Age 3 credits 
HIS 326 The Turbulent Sixties 3 credits 
HIS 327 The Civil Rights Movement 3 credits 
HIS391 Special Topics in American History 3 credits 

Minimum 6 credits European History 

HIS 145 Europe History To Renaissance 3 credits 
HIS 146 Europe History Since Renaissance 3 credits 
HIS 219 World War II 3 credits 
HIS 245 Ancient Greece 3 credits 
HIS 246 Ancient Rome 3 credits 
HIS 247 Medieval Europe 3 credits 
HIS 271 Imperial Russia 3 credits 
HIS 272 Soviet Russia 3 credits 
HIS 345 Ancient Greek & Roman History 3 credits 

Writers 
HIS 346 Famous Greeks & Romans 3 credits 
HIS 347 Women in the Ancient & Medieval 3 credits 

World 
HIS 348 Ancient & Medieval Warfare 3 credits 
HIS 352 Anti-Semitism Before Holocaust 3 credits 
HIS 371 Russian Film 3 credits 
HIS 383 Hitler & Stalin 3 credits 
HIS 392 Special Topics in European History 3 credits 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


History 
107 History 

Minimum 6 credits World History 
SOCIAL STUDIES EDUCATION CERTIFICATION PROGRAM: 5-YEAR 

HIS 170 Wrld His I: Agr To Zheng He 3 credits OPTION WITH AN M.S. IN EDUCATION 
HIS 171 Wrld His Ii: Explr-Atomic 3 credits This program enables students to graduate as a History major while 
HIS 175 World Geography 3 credits completing their content area requirements for Pennsylvania teacher 
HIS 205 History of the Modern Far East 3 credits 

certification in Social Studies. Along with their history and social studies 
HIS 270 20th Century World History 3 credits 

content courses, students take the PRAXIS I national Teacher Exam, EDUC 

HIS 273 
Ancient Near East 3 credits 

210, Comparative Issues in Education and WL 101, Culturally and 

HIS 274 Modern Middle East 3 credits 
Linguistically Diverse Learners. Following acceptance by the Education 

HIS 275 
History of Central Asia 3 credits 

HIS 280 
Gendering World History I: Sex/Power 3 credits Department into the program, in the fifth year (at the Masters level reduced 
Ancient World tuition rate), students complete their education requirements and their 

HIS 281 
Gendering World History II: Sex/Power 3 credits student teaching, and earning both their teacher’s certification in Social 
Modern World 

Studies as well as an M.S. in Secondary Education 

HIS 370 Ancient History and Modern Media 3 credits 
HIS 372 Modern Empire/Gender/Power & Film 3 credits 

REQUIRED HISTORY CURRICULUM (42 credits) 

HIS 380 
Empire & Imperialism I: Ancient World 3 credits 

Required Courses 

HIS 381 
Empire & Imperialism II: Modern World 3 credits 

HIS 214 Pennsylvania History 
3 credits 

HIS 382 
Crime & Violence in Modern World 3 credits 

HIS 301 Historical Methods/Historiography 3 credits 

HIS 393 
Special Topics in World History 3 credits 

HIS 480 Senior Seminar 3 credits 
OR 

Additional Required Courses 

HIS 490 Senior Thesis 
3 credits 

HIS 301 
Historical Methods/Historiography 3 credits 

Minimum 6 credits U.S. History: 

HIS 214 
Pennsylvania History 3 credits 

HIS 101 
US History To 1865 3 credits 

Three additional courses of the student's choosing 9 credits 

HIS 102 US History Since 1865 3 credits 
HIS 211 Colonial America 3 credits 

REQUIRED SOCIAL STUDIES CURRICULUM 24 credits 

HIS 212 
Revolutionary America 3 credits 

(a number of these courses also satisfy the student's requirements in the 

HIS 213 
Early Republican America 3 credits 

Mercyhurst University REACH Curriculum) 

HIS 214 
Pennsylvania History 3 credits 

PSYC 101 Introduction to Psychology 3 credits 

HIS 216 
Civil War & Reconstruction 3 credits 

SOC 100 Introduction to Sociology 3 credits 

HIS 217 
Making Modern Amer 1877-1920 3 credits 

ECON 105 Macroeconomics 
3 credits 

HIS 218 
3 credits 

ANTH 112 World Cultures 
3 credits 

HIS 220 
America Since 1945 3 credits 

HIS 175 World Geography 
3 credits 

HIS 221 
Us Environmental History 3 credits 

POLI 100 American Government 3 credits 

HIS 224 
Vietnam War 3 credits 

POLI 303 Geopolitics 
3 credits 

HIS 225 
Expl Amer Cult 1920-Present 3 credits 

OR 

HIS 230 
History Of American West 3 credits 

POLI 236 World Politics 
3 credits 

HIS 232 
African Americans in Film 3 credits 

Two (2) Mathematics Courses Above College Algebra 6 credits 

HIS 235 
Intro to Public History Museum Studies 3 credits 

level 

HIS 236 Intro to Historic Preservation 3 credits 
HIS 240 Museum Studies II 3 credits 

REQUIRED EDUCATION CURRICULUM -39 credits 

HIS 305 
American Material Culture/Built Landscape 3 credits 

(several courses will also count for the Liberal Arts Core) 

HIS 316 
Labor and Working Class America 3 credits 

WL 101 Culturally/Linguistically Diverse 3 credits 

HIS 325 
America in the Nuclear Age 3 credits 

Learners 

HIS 326 
The Turbulent Sixties 3 credits 

EDUC 210 Comparative Issues in Education 3 credits 

HIS 327 
The Civil Rights Movement 3 credits 

Psychology of Diverse Learners 3 credits 

HIS391 
Special Topics in American History 3 credits 

Inclusive Practices 3 credits 
21st Century Literacies 3 credits 
Critical Teaching Strategies 3 credits 
Curriculum & Instructional: Social 3 credits 
Studies 
Clinical I Secondary Education 3 credits 


EDUC 475 Capstone Clinical 
9 credits 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


History 108 History 
Minimum 6 credits European History REQUIRED SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT AREA (24 credits, 15 counting in 
HIS 145 Europe History To Renaissance 3 credits the Liberal Arts Core) 
HIS 146 Europe History Since Renaissance 3 credits PSYC 101 Introduction to Psychology 3 credits 
HIS 219 World War II 3 credits SOC 100 Introduction to Sociology) 3 credits 
HIS 245 Ancient Greece 3 credits ECON 105 Macroeconomics 3 credits 
HIS 246 Ancient Rome 3 credits ANTH 101 General Anthropology 3 credits 
HIS 247 Medieval Europe 3 credits OR 
HIS 271 Imperial Russia 3 credits ANTH 112 World Cultures 3 credits 
HIS 272 Soviet Russia 3 credits HIS 175 World Geography 3 credits 
HIS 345 Ancient Greek & Roman History 3 credits POLI 100 American Government 3 credits 
Writers POLI 303 Geopolitics 3 credits 
HIS 346 Famous Greeks & Romans 3 credits OR 
HIS 347 Women in the Ancient & Medieval 3 credits POLI 334 Int'l Relations 3 credits 
World OR 
HIS 348 Ancient & Medieval Warfare 3 credits POLI 236 World Politics (3 credits) 3 credits 
HIS 352 Anti-Semitism Before Holocaust 3 credits Second Mathematics Course (required) 3 credits 
HIS 371 Russian Film 3 credits 
HIS 383 Hitler & Stalin 3 credits 
HIS 392 Special Topics in European History 3 credits 
Minimum 6 credits World History 
HIS 170 Wrld His I: Agr To Zheng He 3 credits 
HIS 171 Wrld His Ii: Explr-Atomic 3 credits 
HIS 175 World Geography 3 credits 
HIS 205 History of the Modern Far East 3 credits 
HIS 270 20th Century World History 3 credits 
HIS 273 Ancient Near East 3 credits 
HIS 274 Modern Middle East 3 credits 
HIS 275 History of Central Asia 3 credits 
HIS 280 Gendering World History I: Sex/Power 3 credits 
Ancient World 
HIS 281 Gendering World History II: Sex/Power 3 credits 
Modern World 
HIS 370 Ancient History and Modern Media 3 credits 
HIS 372 Modern Empire/Gender/Power & Film 3 credits 
HIS 380 Empire & Imperialism I: Ancient World 3 credits 
HIS 381 Empire & Imperialism II: Modern World 3 credits 
HIS 382 Crime & Violence in Modern World 3 credits 
HIS 393 Special Topics in World History 3 credits 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Hospitality Management 109 Hospitality Management 

Hospitality Management 

DEPARTMENT CHAIR 

Daryl Georger, D.Ed. 

FACULTY 
Assistant Professors: 


Daryl Georger, D.Ed. 
Beth Ann Sheldon, M.Ed., R.D. 


Instructors: 

Chef Dennis Dunne, B.A. 
Robert Green, B.S. 
Ryan Johnson, M.S. 
Chef Meghan Mehler, B.A. 
Allyson Schrimper-Minor, M.S. 
Chef Joel Young C.E.C. 


INTRODUCTION 

The Statler Department of Hospitality Management (HM) offers 
baccalaureate degrees with a unique blend of classroom theory and field 
experience. 

The Department of Hospitality Management was developed at Mercyhurst 
over 45 years ago in response to a growing demand for professionals in this 
field. Since 1992, the HM program has held accreditation from the 
Accreditation Commission for Programs in Hospitality Administration 
(ACPHA). 

HM students are provided with hands on experiences and numerous 
opportunities to practice their hospitality skills in appropriate and 
challenging environments. The accredited HM curriculum has been designed 
to provide the essential management abilities needed by professional 
management in this global, highly specialized and diversified industry. 

The Statler Department of Hospitality Management facilities include a 
commercially equipped food service facility in the Center for Academic 
Excellence (the Marriott lab kitchen, the Marriott restaurant/Cafe and the 
Café Diem coffee shop), an actual Hilton Specified guest room and 
housekeeping lab (the Hilton Corporation Hotel lab), and the Statler 
Technology Center, a state-of-the-art smart classroom dedicated in honor of 
Ellsworth Milton Statler, America’s premier hotelier. The Statler Department 
of Hospitality and its facilities have been partially funded and supported by 
the Statler Foundation. Additionally, Mercyhurst’s Statler Department of 
Hospitality Management partners with a regional country/golf club, offering 
students hands-on experiences in club management. 

MISSION STATEMENT 

The Statler Department of Hospitality Management fosters and promotes 
the spirit of hospitality consistent with the Mercyhurst mission of service to 
others and the community. In keeping with the founding vision of 
Mercyhurst, hospitality students are prepared for industry leadership 

through a balance of liberal studies, business and hospitality industry-
specific course work. This balanced approach to higher education nurtures 
scholarship, creativity, communication and responsible stewardship for the 
global hospitality community. Hospitality industry course work and world 
class internships, supported by the Walker College of Business core business 
curriculum, provides the hospitality student with a strong foundation in 
accounting, finance, and management, while building leadership, critical 
thinking skills, and problem solving skills required for success at the national 
and international levels. 

PROGRAM STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 

The Statler Department of Hospitality Management includes learning 
outcomes and guidelines that have been established by the HM faculty, 
hospitality industry leaders, and world-class hospitality corporate 
management training programs. Students are expected to: 

Demonstrate an acquisition of skills related to technical systems used in 
hospitality outlets. 

Apply basic marketing concepts to industry promotion in all areas of 
concentrations. 

Accurately complete and understand financial data related to areas of 
hospitality management curriculum. 

Apply knowledge of critical thinking to functional areas of hospitality 
business to identify, analyze and solve business problems. 

Demonstrate learned standards of professionalism while applying basic 
principles and theories of management independently and when working 
with others. 

Apply classroom theory to experiential settings in the lab and through 
cooperative learning experiences. 

SERVICE PRACTICUM REQUIREMENT 

A service practicum (200 hours) is required for all students regardless of 
transfer or class status and must be fulfilled prior to graduation. Seventy-
five percent of the requirement must be completed internally within the 
department or in department sponsored functions. The remaining 25 
percent may be completed outside of the department with the chair’s 
approval. Upon completion of the required practicum hours, three credits 
may be granted in the final term. Details are available in the HM 
Department office regarding specific requirements of this program. It is the 
student’s responsibility to read the service practicum policy to make certain 
they are in compliance and to schedule practicum hours in a timely fashion. 

STUDENT IN GOOD STANDING POLICY 

The HM Department reserves the right to terminate enrollment for students 
who fail to meet academic, professional and personal standards. The 
academic standard addresses GPA and class attendance; the professional 
standard includes service hours and work experience; and the personal 
behavior standard encompasses ethical issues on and off campus, in any 
setting that may reflect negatively on the student and/or the program. The 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Hospitality Management 110 Hospitality Management 

department reserves the right to admonish and expel any student who has 
been found in serious violation of any of these tenets, which are held in the 
highest regard. Student in Good Standing policy documents can be obtained 
in the Hospitality Management office. 

Student Trips: It is expected that students participating in department-
sponsored trips will follow all rules as outlined in the Event Attendee Policy 
Guide (posted in HM Department). The faculty reserves the right to approve 
all attendee participation based on such criteria as grade level, academic 
standing and student performance. Students must read and sign an 
agreement in order to be allowed to participate in trips. Students must 
complete two terms in the department and be in good standing to be 
allowed to participate in department sponsored trips. 
A qualified student (one who has departmental permission or earned at 
least 60 credits or has taken at least 6 HM courses) may choose to intern 
during the summer or to leave campus during the regular academic calendar 
year to obtain valuable management experience. 

HM MAJOR/CONCENTRATION -BACHELOR OF ARTS REQUIREMENTS 

All HM majors must carry a minimum 2.5 GPA in major courses, overall, to 
meet departmental and certification requirements. Any special programs 
and/or certificate offerings under the supervision of the HM Department 
must meet similarly stipulated requirements. HM Department requirements 
can supersede university requirement(s) and may be modified at any time. 
Student majors who fail to earn a grade of C or higher in an HM course or 
concentration course must repeat the course. If the student does not receive 
a C after repeating the course, a decision will be made by the chair regarding 
permission to retake the course or possible termination from the major. 

TRANSFER STUDENTS 

Students transferring into the HM Department from another college or 
department are governed by the Mercyhurst transfer policy. The transfer 
policy stipulates that no major course with a grade below a C will be 
accepted, at least one half the credits required by the HM Department (31 
credits) must be completed at Mercyhurst (unless otherwise specified by 
articulation agreement(s), no HM course or departmental offering may be 
taken on a pass-fail basis, all transfer students are subject to the same 
requirements as the traditional student majoring in the HM curriculum, and 
all transfer students must complete the 200 required practicum hours prior 
to HM academic program completion. The HM Department will accept a 
maximum of 50 community service hours from the student’s transfer 
institution. 

SOPHOMORE REVIEW 

The HM Department requires students to meet sophomore review board 
criteria during their second year of the program. The details of these 
procedures are on file in the HM office and are available at any time. It is the 
responsibility of the student to meet eligibility requirements, as set forth by 
this process, and to prepare adequately for this review. The department 
chair makes a final recommendation, based on a careful review by 
department faculty/ staff, for an HM sophomore to pass with distinction, 
pass, pass pending, probation, or fail. A designation below pass pending 
requires a meeting with the department chair and/or faculty to discuss 
problem areas or specific concerns. A final letter is sent to each student 

confirming his or her status upon completion of the review board process. A 
failed sophomore review will result in the student’s dismissal from the 
major. If a student is placed on probation, he/she will have one term to 
make the mandated improvements. If this does not occur, the department 
will have the right to dismiss the student from the major. As part of the 
review board process, each program participant is encouraged to work (as 
time permits) in hospitality-related operations both on campus and 
elsewhere in addition to practicum hour requirements as detailed in the 
practicum hour policy guide (available in the HM Department Office). 

DEPARTMENT SCHOLARSHIPS 

Annually, the HM Department makes several cash awards available through 
a variety of department-endowed scholarships. Specific cash awards are 
governed by criteria as detailed in the University Catalog under restricted 
scholarships. Senior and faculty service awards are also granted on the basis 
of merit as determined by the faculty of the department. 

CORE PROFESSIONAL EDUCATION 

The HM degree is designed to develop well-rounded individuals through a 
balance of liberal arts and broad-based hospitality and business courses. All 
major programs in the department require the successful completion of 54 
credits in HM Core Professional Education courses. Students are required to 
take Statistics, Macroeconomics and Spanish as part of the Hospitality Core 
Curriculum. All majors are required to complete the following courses in 
partial fulfillment of the Bachelor of Arts degree: 

CORE HM PROFESSIONAL EDUCATION 

HRIM 100 Introduction to the Hospitality Industry 3 credits 
HRIM 101 Applied Service Methodology 1 credit 
HRIM 110 Sanitation & Safety 2 credits 
HRIM 175 Hospitality Engineering 3 credits 
HRIM 201 Hotel Rooms Management 3 credits 
HRIM 212 Purchasing for the Hospitality Industry 3 credits 
HRIM 234 Intro to Food Service Management 3 credits 
HRIM 235 Intro to Food Service Management Lab 1 credit 
HRIM 306 Wine and Spirit Management 3 credits 
Management 
HRIM 380 Hospitality Law 3 credits 
HRIM 401 Hospitality Management Cost Controls 3 credits 
HRIM 434 Advanced Food Service Management 3 credits 
HRIM 435 Advanced Food Service Management Lab 2 credits 
HRIM 450 Senior Seminar 3 credits 
HRIM 455 HRIM Service Practicum 3 credits 
ACCT 101 Principles of Accounting I/Financial 3 credits 
ECON 106 Microeconomics 3 credits 
MGMT120 Principles of Management 3 credits 
MGMT 206 Human Resource Management 3 credits 
MKTG 162 Principles of Integrated Marketing 3 credits 

COMPUTER COMPETENCIES 

Students are expected to be competent in the following programs: Word, 
Access, Excel and PowerPoint. Any deficiencies in this area of computer 
competency should be addressed prior to the student’s junior level. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Hospitality Management 111 Hospitality Management 

DEPARTMENT CONCENTRATIONS 

In addition to the HM core, it is a mandatory requirement for all HM majors 
to specialize in and complete one of the following departmental 
concentrations. (Students working toward multiple concentrations are 
expected to develop expertise in each distinct area of study. A minimum of 
one elective course in each area of concentration must be distinct and will 
not be accepted for more than one concentration. Required courses in the 
concentration may overlap and will be accepted for each concentration.) 

HOTEL MANAGEMENT CONCENTRATION 

FPM 209 Housekeeping Operations & 3 credits 
Management 
HRIM 260 Hospitality Marketing and Sales 3 credits 
HRIM 417 Advanced Hotel Operations 3 credits 
Two courses from the HM department recommended list 6 credits 
of electives or other HM concentrations. 
HRIM 473 Hospitality Internship 0-3 credits 
HRIM 475 Hospitality Internship 3 credits 
HRIM 476 Hospitality Internship 6 credits 

*Students must complete 6 credit hours of Internships (taken in any 
combination) 

FOOD & BEVERAGE MANAGEMENT CONCENTRATION 

BIO 180 Microorganisms 3 credits 
BIO 181 Microorganisms Lab 1 credit 
FNUT 131 Introduction to Nutrition 3 credits 
HRIM 405 International Cuisine 4 credits 
Two courses from the HM department recommended list 6 credits 
of electives or other HM concentrations. 
HRIM 473 Hospitality Internship 0-3 credits 
HRIM 475 Hospitality Internship 3 credits 
HRIM 476 Hospitality Internship 6 credits 
*Students must complete 6 credit hours of Internships (taken in any 
combination) 

EVENT MANAGEMENT CONCENTRATION 

HMC 205 Introduction to Event Management 3 credits 
HMC 215 Convention and Trade Show 3 credits 

Management 
HMC 305 Catering Management and Operations 3 credits 
HMC 315 Promotional Strategies for Meetings and 3 credits 

Conventions 
Or 
HMC 425 Wedding Planning 3 credits 
One course from the HM department recommended list of 3 credits 
electives or other HM concentrations. 
HRIM 473 Hospitality Internship 0-3 credits 
HRIM 475 Hospitality Internship 3 credits 
HRIM 476 Hospitality Internship 6 credits 
*Students must complete 6 credit hours of Internships (taken in any 
combination) 

HM DEPARTMENT RECOMMENDED LIST OF ELECTIVES 

HMG 322 Club Management 3 credits 
HRIM 240 Casino and Gaming Operations 3 credits 

Management 
HRIM 416 Mixology 3 credits 
HRIM 452 Industry Consulting/Speaker Series 3 credits 
MGMT 405 Quality Leadership 3 credits 
By permission, an advanced language course above the 3 credits 
first level may be accepted for one elective 

MINOR PROGRAM 

The Statler Department of Hospitality Management will allow non-
hospitality majors to gain entry-level knowledge of two main areas of the 
Hospitality Industry including Hotel Operations and Food and Beverage 
Management. Completion of the minor, plus 50 department related service 
hours, will qualify the student for employment recruitment by department 
corporate and industry partners. No minor course may be taken on a 
pass/fail basis and a GPA of 2.5 or higher must be maintained in all HM 
minor courses. 

MINOR COURSE REQUIREMENTS 

HRIM 100 Intro to Hospitality Management 3 credits 
HRIM 101 Applied Service Methods 1 credit 
HRIM 110 Sanitation and Safety 2 credits 
HRIM 201 Hotel Room Operations 3 credits 
HRIM 212 Purchasing for the Hospitality Industry 3 credits 
HRIM 234 Introduction to Food Service 3 credits 

Management 
HRIM 235 Introduction to Food Service 1 credit 

Management Lab 
HRIM 260 Hospitality Marketing and Sales 3 credits 
HRIM 380 Hospitality Law 3 credits 
*One Department Elective from the HM department 3 credits 
recommended list of electives or other HM 
concentrations. 

SUMMER ABROAD 

Opportunities to study and travel abroad are available and may include 
study in Ireland, Switzerland, Greece, Costa Rica, Italy, Australia and more. 
Details are available in the chair’s office or the Study Abroad Office. 

TRANSFERS 

The HM Department recognizes many other fine institutions and hospitality 
programs. Future HM students may transfer into the program during any 
semester. The department makes every attempt to make the transition into 
the HM department as expedient and efficient as possible. Students 
transferring from institutions outside Mercyhurst are governed by the 
University Transfer Policy (see Transfer Policy in the University Catalog). One 
half of all HM classes must be completed at Mercyhurst in order to satisfy 
degree requirements. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Hospitality Management 112 Hospitality Management 

ORGANIZATIONS -ETA SIGMA DELTA (ESD) 

Eta Sigma Delta is the international hospitality and tourism honor society for 
academically outstanding students in the hospitality field. It is affiliated 
with CHRIE (Council on Hotel Restaurant and Institutional Education) in 
which Mercyhurst maintains membership. To be eligible for membership in 
the Mercyhurst Chapter of ESD, a student must be a junior or senior and rank 
in the top 20 percent of the HM class. ESD members participate in various 
activities during the year such as community service projects, fundraising for 
the ESD Chapter Scholarship, and working on a variety of special projects in 
conjunction with the chair’s office. 

HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION (HMA) 

HMA is a service organization that assists the department in its various 
endeavors. Students participate in educational enrichment opportunities 
(for example student sales blitz activities with nationally recognized chains 
and field trips) that aid in the enhancement of their knowledge of the 
hospitality industry. Working closely with the faculty and staff, fundraising 
events are scheduled throughout the year to benefit a variety of club and 
department activities. This student organization sponsors the annual senior 
dinner where HM graduation certificates and faculty awards are given. 

PROFESSIONAL CONVENTION MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION (PCMA) 

The PCMA student chapter was formed to increase management awareness 
of meetings and conventions, to broaden their scope of activity, refine their 
educational pursuits, and to expand the training base for students 
interested in the meeting and convention field. 

DEPARTMENTAL MEMBERSHIPS AND AFFILIATIONS 

Accreditation Commission for Programs in Hospitality Administration 
(ACPHA) 
Council on Hotel Restaurant and Institutional Education (CHRIE) 
National Restaurant Association (NRA) 
American Hotel and Motel Association (AH & MA) 
Professional Convention Management Association (PCMA) 
Foodservice Consultants Society International (FCSI) 
Hotel Sales and Marketing Association International (HSMAI) 


2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Intelligence Studies 113 
Intelligence Studies 

Intelligence Studies 

DEPARTMENT CHAIR 

David J. Grabelski, M.S. 

FACULTY 

Associate Professors: 

James G. Breckenridge, Ph.D., MBA, M.A., Dean of the Ridge College 
of Intelligence Studies and Applied Sciences 
Kristan J. Wheaton, J.D., M.A. 


Assistant Professors: 

Orlandrew E. Danzell, Ph.D., M.A. 
Shelly L. Freyn, MBA, Director, Business & Competitive Intelligence 
Major 
David J. Grabelski, M.S. 
Michael Lamm, M.A. 
Arthur H. Mills, M.A. 
Dawn M. Wozneak, Ph.D., M.S., Chair, Applied Intelligence and Data 
Science Graduate Programs 


Visiting Assistant Professor: 

Musa Tuzuner, Ph.D. 

Instructor: 

William Welch, M.S. 

Founder and Director Emeritus: 

Robert J. Heibel, M.A. 

Ridge College Director of Online and Off-site Graduate 
Programs: 


Linda Bremmer, M.Ed. 

HIDTA Administrator/Research Director: 

Brad Gleason, M.S. 

Ridge College Instructional Designers: 

Kayla Murphy, M.Ed. 
Peter Musacchio, B.A. 


MISSION STATEMENT 

It is the mission of the Department of Intelligence Studies to produce 
graduates who are skilled in utilizing a variety of sources of data and 
analytic techniques to lead the collaborative development of high-quality 
written and oral analytic intelligence products that, in service toward a just 
world, inform decision-makers, thereby fostering an appreciation for the 
dignity of work and commitment to serving others. 

INTELLIGENCE STUDIES MAJOR BACHELOR OF ARTS 

To be recommended for graduation, the student must have a minimum 
overall GPA of 3.0. No courses listed under the major course requirements 
may be taken on a pass-fail basis. In addition, students who earn a grade of 
D+ or less in any major core course must repeat that course. 

Students must be aware that future employment often requires intensive 
background investigations, and any conduct deemed significantly unethical, 
illegal, or unprofessional may result in that student failing to achieve 
employment in the field regardless of his/her academic record. 

The college shall conduct an annual review of the academic progress of all 
students enrolled in the program. Any student whose GPA falls below 3.0 or 
who might otherwise exhibit behavior that is not conducive to ensuring 
employment in his/her field will be placed on probation or removed from 
the program, depending on the outcome of the review. 

INTELLIGENCE STUDIES PROGRAM STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 

• 
Describe the theory and history of the discipline of intelligence. 
• 
Demonstrate critical thinking skills. 
• 
Analyze collected data/information using a variety of analytic 
techniques and methodologies. 
• 
Communicate analytic products in both oral and/or written 
formats. 
• 
Execute extensive open source research and collection 
management. 
• 
Implement and manage intelligence processes and practices. 
INTELLIGENCE STUDIES MAJOR COURSE REQUIREMENTS 

(Students must achieve a grade of C or higher) 
RIAP 177 Intro to Intelligence Studies 3 credits 
RIAP 178 Intelligence Methods and Analysis 3 credits 
RIAP 276 Law Enforcement Intelligence 3 credits 
RIAP 240 Intelligence for Business 3 credits 
RIAP 213 National Security and Intelligence 3 credits 
RIAP 250 Professional Communications 1 credit 
RIAP 275 Intelligence Writing and Presentation 3 credits 
OR 
RIAP 280 Communicating Intelligence Analysis I 2 credits 
AND 
RIAP 281 Communicating Intelligence Analysis II 2 credits 
RIAP 425 Strategic Intelligence 3 credits 

NON-RIAP INTEL REQUIRED COURSES: 

MIS 110 Advanced Computer Applications 3 credits 
OR 
MIS 150 Intro to Data Science 3 credits 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Intelligence Studies 114 
Intelligence Studies 

RIAP ELECTIVES – 4 required from below: 
BUSINESS & COMPETITIVE INTELLIGENCE MAJOR BACHELOR OF ARTS 

RIAP 303 American Military History 3 credits 
RIAP 305 Intelligence, Military and Warfare 3 credits 
RIAP 310 Topics in Intelligence 3 credits 
RIAP 311 Collection Operations 3 credits 
RIAP 312 Social Media Analysis 3 credits 
RIAP 316 Intelligence in Film 3 credits 
RIAP 317 Data Visualization 3 credits 
RIAP 320 Advanced Law Enforcement Intel 3 credits 
RIAP 321 Law and Practice in Law Enforcement Intel 3 credits 
RIAP 322 Law Enforcement Intel Tools and Tech 3 credits 
RIAP 325 Cyber Threat Analysis 3 credits 
RIAP 360 Financial Intelligence Analysis 3 credits 
RIAP 365 Advanced Competitive Intelligence 3 credits 
RIAP 368 Climate Change and National Security 3 credits 
RIAP 372 Terrorism 3 credits 
RIAP 374 History of Intelligence 3 credits 
RIAP 395 Geospatial Intelligence 3 credits 
RIAP 420 Advanced Analytic Techniques 3 credits 
RIAP 435 Grand Strategy 3 credits 
RIAP 438 Market Research and Primary Intelligence 3 credits 
RIAP 475 Internship 3-9 credits 

NON-RIAP REQUIRED COURSES – Pick Four (4 courses; 12 credits; may 
be same category or completion of a minor will satisfy the non-RIAP 
requirement) 

Business 300-or 400-level course 3 credits 
Communication 300-or 400-level course 3 credits 
Criminal Justice 300-or 400-level course 3 credits 
History 300-or 400-level course 3 credits 
Information 300-or 400-level course 3 credits 
Technology 
Mathematics 300-or 400-level course 3 credits 
Public Health 200-or 300-level course 3 credits 
Political Science 300-or 400-level course 3 credits 
World Languages 300-or 400-level course 3 credits 

TRACK (must select either language track or computer track) 

Language – (complete 3 courses) 

Language I 3 credits 
Language II 3 credits 
Language III 3 credits 

Computer Track (compete 3 courses; students may also complete the 
Data Science Honors Program for credit) 

MATH 146 Programming I 4 credits 
MIS 140 Computer Operations 3 credits 
MIS 260 Networks 3 credits 
MIS 280 Introduction to Internet Programming 3 credits 
MIS 302 Information Systems Analysis & Design 3 credits 
MIS 350 Database Management 3 credits 
MIS 370 Client-Side Programming 3 credits 
MIS 380 Server-Side Programming 3 credits 

To be recommended for graduation, the student must have a minimum 
overall GPA of 3.0. No courses listed under the major course requirements 
may be taken on a pass-fail basis. In addition, students who earn a grade of 
D+ or less in any major core course must repeat that course. 

Students must be aware that future employment often requires intensive 
background investigations, and any conduct deemed significantly unethical, 
illegal, or unprofessional may result in that student failing to achieve 
employment in the field regardless of his/her academic record. 

The college shall conduct an annual review of the academic progress of all 
students enrolled in the program. Any student whose GPA falls below 3.0 or 
who might otherwise exhibit behavior that is not conducive to ensuring 
employment in his/her field will be placed on probation or removed from 
the program, depending on the outcome of the review. 

BUSINESS & COMPETITIVE INTELLIGENCE PROGRAM STUDENT 
LEARNING OUTCOMES 

• 
Describe the theory and history of the discipline of intelligence. 
• 
Demonstrate critical thinking skills. 
• 
Analyze collected data/information using a variety of analytic 
techniques and methodologies. 
• 
Produce analytic products in written, oral, visual, and/or 
multimedia formats 
• 
Execute extensive open source research and collection 
management. 
• 
Implement and manage intelligence processes and practices. 
• 
Apply methodologies, theories, and research skills to develop an 
integrated cohesive strategy for an organization to achieve a 
common goal and/or resolve a market research problem. 
BUSINESS & COMPETITIVE INTELLIGENCE MAJOR COURSE 
REQUIREMENTS 

(Students must achieve a grade of C or higher) 
RIAP 177 Intro to Intelligence Studies 3 credits 
RIAP 178 Intelligence Methods and Analysis 3 credits 
RIAP 240 Intelligence for Business 3 credits 
RIAP 250 Professional Communications 1 credit 
RIAP 275 Intelligence Writing and Presentation 3 credits 
OR 
RIAP 280 Communicating Intelligence Analysis I 2 credits 
AND 
RIAP 281 Communicating Intelligence Analysis II 2 credits 
RIAP 365 Adv Competitive Intelligence 3 credits 
RIAP 425 Strategic Intelligence 3 credits 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Intelligence Studies 115 Intelligence Studies 

INTELLIGENCE ELECTIVES – 3 required from below: 

RIAP 310 Topics in Intelligence 3 credits 
RIAP 312 Social Media Analysis 3 credits 
RIAP 317 Data Visualization 3 credits 
RIAP 325 Cyber Threat Analysis 3 credits 
RIAP 360 Financial Intelligence Analysis 3 credits 
RIAP 395 Geospatial Intelligence 3 credits 
RIAP 420 Advanced Analytic Techniques 3 credits 
RIAP 435 Grand Strategy 3 credits 
RIAP 475 Internship 3-9 credits 

REQUIRED BUSINESS COURSES 

ACCT 101 Principles of Accounting I 3 credits 
OR 
ACCT 102 Principles of Accounting II 3 credits 
BADM 310 Business Law I 3 credits 
BADM 350 Business Ethics 3 credits 
ECON 105 Macroeconomics 3 credits 
ECON 106 Microeconomics 3 credits 
STAT 109 Statistics 3 credits 
OR 
STAT 135 Business Statistics 3 credits 
MKTG 162 Principles of Integrated Marketing 3 credits 
MKTG 357 Market Research 3 credits 
OR 
RIAP 438 Market Research and Primary 3 credits 

Intelligence 

DATA SCIENCE/COMPUTER TRACK – (complete 3 courses; students 
may also complete the Data Science Honors Program for credit) 

MATH 110 Data Analysis: Python 3 credits 
MATH 126 Sports Analytics 3 credits 
MIS 150 Introduction to Data Science 3 credits 
MATH 146 Programming I 4 credits 
MIS 260 Networks 3 credits 
MIS 280 Introduction to Internet 3 credits 

Programming 
MIS 302 Information Systems Analysis & 3 credits 

Design 
MIS 350 Database Management 3 credits 
MIS 370 Client-Side Programming 3 credits 
MIS 380 Server-Side Programming 3 credits 
Other approved MATH and MIS courses, as 3 credits 
designated by program director 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Interior Architecture & Design 116 
Interior Architecture & Design 

Interior Architecture & Design 

DEPARTMENT CHAIR 

Kathy Weidenboerner, M.Ed. ASID, IDEC,IIDA, 

FACULTY 

Assistant Professor: 

Kathy Weidenboerner, M.Ed, 
ASID, IIDA, IDEC 


Instructor 

Keyman Asefi, BSc, MA, Allied ASID, IDEC 

Adjunct: 

Analida Braeger, B.S., M.A. 
Andrew Lapiska, MBA 
Donna Zariczny, B.A., NCARB Certified 


INTRODUCTION 

Interior Architecture and Design is a multifaceted profession in which 
creative and technical solutions are applied within a structure to achieve a 
built interior environment. Interior Architecture and Design includes a scope 
of services performed by a professional design practitioner, qualified by 
means of education, experience, and examination, to protect and enhance 
the life, health, safety and welfare of the public. Interior Design is a service 
profession concerned with the science and art of providing optimal living, 
working, learning, and playing environments for human beings throughout 
the life cycle. As such, it is an essential component of the architectural 
sciences. Knowledge and skills must be accompanied with confidence, 
empathy and compassion. 

MISSION STATEMENT 

The Interior Architecture and Design Department establishes its mission as 
the promotion of the intellectual, emotional, social, physical, and spiritual 
growth of the student as an effective citizen through liberal and professional 
education. Therefore, the programs prepare the student not only for a 
career, but also for life. Faculty and students are challenged to integrate 
social responsibility with career competence and a commitment to human 
values. 

PHILOSOPHY 

The faculty believes: 

• 
That education is a life-long process of guided and purposeful activity, 
directed toward the development of the individual according to 
his/her needs, abilities, interests and potential; 
• 
That education is not merely a passive acquisition of knowledge but 
the meaningful interpretation of that knowledge, and an 
understanding capable of producing intelligent decisions and actions; 
• 
That learning is a change in behavior brought about through 
experience; 
• 
That the identification of learning outcomes is done cooperatively by 
the student and teacher; 
• 
That self-discovery, self-growth and self-expression are best achieved 
in a relaxed and open environment which remains sensitive and 
adaptive to the student’s needs and abilities; and 
• 
That the teacher is a facilitator of that self-discovery and self-growth. 
They further believe that learning in the professional environment, where 
students interact with clients and professionals and can apply theoretical 
principles, is very effective in developing professional proficiency as well as 
classroom/studio-oriented education. 

The meaning of this philosophy for Interior Architecture and Design 
education is that the curriculum should provide a judicious balance of 
learning experience with essential knowledge and understanding to be 
gained in the physical, behavioral and social sciences, humanities, 
professional sciences and communicative sciences. As potential translators 
of architectural and interior science, the students need the science 
(knowledge) and the art (skill) inherent in the Interior Design profession. 
Only when they have cultivated moral values can they translate this science 
and art into action, in a wide variety of settings, with sensitivity, self-
reliance, social concern and genuine compassion for others. 

PROGRAM STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 

Program graduates are envisioned to be competent Interior Designers, with 
a liberal education, who instill in their profession a vision of all the arts, and 
who see their own art with clearer perspective within the context of an 
increasingly complex and global world. Students of the Mercyhurst Interior 
Architecture and Design program will be able to: 

Understand and address the human needs (social, economic, political, 
psychological, and physiological) in the applied practice of interior design. 

Develop a strong sense of the theoretical basis of art and design. Analytically 
balance and successfully integrate the theoretical and technical issues of 
interior environments. 

Demonstrate business, organizational skills and managerial ability. 

Act responsibly in their concern about issues related to public health and 
safety, professional ethics and demonstrate a willingness to advance not 
only themselves but the profession of interior design as a whole. 

BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN INTERIOR ARCHITECTURE AND DESIGN 
MAJOR REQUIREMENTS 

The Interior Architecture and Design Department offers courses leading to a 
Bachelor of Science in Interior Architecture and Design. Students must 
maintain a grade point average of 2.75 in the major. No required courses in 
the major may be taken on a Pass/Fail basis. Students who earn a grade less 
than C in a required major course must repeat the course. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Interior Architecture & Design 117 Interior Architecture & Design 

All prerequisites must be met before continuing in the course curriculum 
sequence. Alteration of the course prerequisites will only be made with 
special permission of the department chair. 

In order to graduate with a degree in Interior Architecture and Design from 
Mercyhurst University, students are required to (1) have a major G.P.A. of 
2.75, (2) have successfully passed the Sophomore Review Process, (3) have 
completed 10 service hours related to the built environment, (4) have 
submitted a final digital portfolio, (5) participated in a senior exit interview, 
and (6) completed all course requirements. 

ID 100 Design Basics 3 credits 
ID 105 Technical Graphics I 3 credits 
ID 107 Introduction to Interior Design 3 credits 
ID 111 Interior Design Studio I Residential 3 credits 
ID 130 Digital Graphics Interior Design 3 credits 
ID 200 Building Technology 3 credits 
ID 205 Technical Graphics II 3 credits 
ID 210 Interior Design Graphics 3 credits 
ID 211 Interior Design Studio II – 3 credits 
Corporate/Industrial 
ID 220 History of Interior Design and Architecture 3 credits 
I 
ID 221 History of Interior Design and Architecture 3 credits 
II 
ID 230 Interior Finishes, Materials & Furniture 3 credits 
ID 231 Human Factors Design 3 credits 
ID 311 Interior Design Studio III – Healthcare and 3 credits 
Recreational 
ID 322 Interior Design Studio IV 3 credits 
Hospitality/Retail 
ID 375 Business & Professional Practices for 3 credits 
Interior Designers 
ID 380 Color and Light 3 credits 
ID 405 Technical Graphics III 3 credits 
ID 406 Technical Graphics IV 3 credits 
ID 410 Senior Seminar I 3 credits 
ID 455 Senior Seminar II 3 credits 
ID 495 Department Directed Internship 3-6 credits 
Art 122 Ancient to Medieval Art History 
OR 
Art 123 Renaissance to 20th Century Art History 
Two (2) additional Major Electives 6 credits 
Major Electives: 
ID 320 Furniture Design 3 credits 
ID 332 Interior Design Studio V Institutional and 3 credits 
Government 
ID 340 Environmental Design I 3 credits 
OR 

ID 450 Advanced Independent Study in Interior Design 1-3 
credits 

PORTFOLIO DEVELOPMENT 

Portfolios are not required for incoming freshmen. 

Students transferring into the program from a non-design program of study 
should meet with the program director to determine advanced standing. 
Students transferring from another design program are required to submit a 
portfolio of their college-level work to appropriately identify credit for 
transferred design courses. 

Students are encouraged to begin development of a college-level portfolio 
beginning in the freshman year to prepare for Sophomore Review and 
placement in Interior Design Internships. Development of such portfolios is a 
natural outgrowth of the design studio environment. 

SOPHOMORE REVIEW 

A review board evaluates students at the end of the sophomore year. The 
student’s continuation in the Interior Design program is based on: (1) a 
minimum 2.75 GPA in major courses; (2) presentation of a resume and an 
Interior Design portfolio; (3) presentation of a career goal statement; (4) 
two letters of recommendation; and (5) successful completion of the 
interview with the review board. 

SENIOR CAPSTONE PROJECT 

All students in the Interior Architecture and Design Program are required to 
complete a senior capstone project prior to graduation. Capstone projects 
involve individualized research that must be pre-approved by program 
leadership. Students apply for project approval and complete research and 
programming of the project by the end of the spring semester of their junior 
year. Project development begins in fall semester of the senior year and 
continues through the spring semester, culminating in the annual Senior 
Interior Architecture and Design Show. 

The senior capstone project requires students to participate in multiple 
juried critiques and progress checkpoints throughout the process. If at any 
given point, student project progress is deemed unacceptable the student 
will not be allowed to register for the subsequent courses until satisfactory 
progress has been achieved. Only approved projects will receive the right to 
be displayed in the exhibition. The program director reserves the right to 
eliminate any unacceptable design project from final display. Due care must 
be taken to produce a project worthy of public display. 

ASSOCIATE DEGREE PROGRAM 

An Associate of Science in Interior Design degree is administered through 
the Mercyhurst North East campus. Students enrolled in the four-year 
program are not eligible for the associate degree. A minimum of 60 credits is 
required for the completion of the associate degree. Students must earn an 
overall 2.5 GPA as well as a 2.75 GPA in the required interior design courses 
in order to meet graduation requirements. No interior design courses may 
be taken on a pass-fail basis. Additionally, students who fail to earn a grade 
of “C” or better in a required major course must repeat the course. Students 
who wish to transfer to a four-year baccalaureate program must meet all 
Bachelor of Science degree requirements. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Interior Architecture & Design 118 Interior Architecture & Design 

ASSOCIATE DEGREE REQUIREMENTS 

Contact the Mercyhurst North East campus for further information. 

PRE-ARCHITECTURE TRACK 

Special advising is available to those students planning to pursue graduate 
work in architecture. Students will receive help in both portfolio preparation 
and curriculum selections. Required additional courses: MATH 170 and PHYS 

201. 
POST BACCALAUREATE ADVANCED CERTIFICATE IN INTERIOR DESIGN 

The advanced certificate in Interior Design has been specifically designed for 
college graduates with a background in design-related fields. Ideal 
candidates are those who want to update their skills, advance to a new 
position, or prepare for a career change. Career counseling by the program 
director, an NCIDQ certified designer, is offered to all participants in this 
program. 

SERVICE LEARNING 

Students are required to complete 10 hours of community service related to 
the built environment through involvement with Mercyhurst University 
Habitat for Humanity or other community service opportunities available 
through interior design coursework. 

WRITING ACROSS THE CURRICULUM 

The department supports the Mercyhurst Writing Across the Curriculum 
Program by requiring writing as part of all courses in the Interior 
Architecture and Design curriculum. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Mathematics and Information Technology 119 Mathematics and Information Technology 

Mathematics and Information Technology 


DEPARTMENT CHAIR 

Donald Platte, Ph.D. 

FACULTY 

Professors: 

Donald Platte, Ph.D. 
Charles Redmond, Ph.D. 


Associate Professor: 

Roger Griffiths, Ph.D. 

Assistant Professors: 

Angela Berardinelli, Ph.D. 
Stephanie Blanda, ABD. 
Patrick Kelly, M.A. 
Lauren Williams, Ph.D. 


INTRODUCTION 

The department offers degrees in Mathematics and Information Technology. 
The goal of the Mathematics/Information Technology Department at 
Mercyhurst is to provide a student with the knowledge essential to the 
pursuit of a career in government, industry, commerce or education, or for 
entrance into graduate school for further study. 

MISSION STATEMENT 

The Department of Mathematics and Information Technology is committed 
to: 

Preparing its mathematics graduates to pursue certification in secondary 
mathematics education or to succeed in graduate programs in mathematics, 
applied mathematics, statistics, operations research, and related disciplines; 

Preparing its information technology graduates for immediate employment 
in the technology sector or for continued graduate study in a computing-
related discipline; 

Providing Mercyhurst University students in Biology, Biochemistry, 
Chemistry, Physics, Forensic Science and Public Health the mathematics 
education and resources they need to be successful in their chosen fields; 

Providing Mercyhurst University students in Intelligence Studies computing 
education opportunities and resources related to their discipline; 

Providing Mercyhurst University students in Graphic Design, Art, Music and 
Dance computing education opportunities and resources related to their 
disciplines; 

Providing all Mercyhurst students with opportunities to improve their basic 

mathematics and computing skills; 

Providing all Mercyhurst students with opportunities to broaden their 
appreciation of mathematics and computing; 

Contributing to the advancement of mathematics, statistics, and computer 
science through published research, conference presentation, and scholarly 
collaboration; 

Sharing educational innovation through publication and conference 
presentation. 

PROGRAM STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 

Mathematics Major 
A graduate earning a B.A. in mathematics from Mercyhurst University must 
be able to: 

Derive equivalent algebraic and analytic expressions from other such 

expressions using sound mechanical technique; 
Solve problems in mathematics that require conceptual understanding for 
their solution; 


Write mathematics correctly; 
Prove mathematical statements. 
Information Technology Major 


A graduate earning a B.A. in information technology from Mercyhurst 
University must be able to: 
Program in a high-level, object-oriented language; 
Query, modify, manage and design databases; 


Analyze computer networks and solve networking problems; 
Construct well-designed, usable websites, with content, presentation and 
functionality separated, adhering to web standards and web accessibility 
guidelines. 


MAJORS AND MINORS 
Majors: Mathematics, Information Technology 
Minors: Mathematics, Information Technology 
MATHEMATICS DEGREE REQUIREMENTS (BACHELOR OF ARTS) 

MATH 170 Calculus I 4 credits 
MATH 171 Calculus II 4 credits 
MATH 150 Linear Algebra 4 credits 
MATH 233 Calculus III 4 credits 
MATH 240 Differential Equations 3 credits 
MATH 245 Geometry 3 credits 
MATH 146 Programming I 4 credits 
OR 
MIS 190 Algorithms 3 credits 
MATH 265 Transition to Adv Mathematics 3 credits 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Mathematics and Information Technology 120 Mathematics and Information Technology 

MATH 280 Modern Algebra I 3 credits 
MATH 281 Modern Algebra II 3 credits 
MATH 291 Statistical Analysis 3 credits 
MATH 370 Advanced Calculus 3 credits 
MATH 400 Topics in Mathematics 3 credits 

It is further recommended that the Mathematics major obtain a minor or 
(preferably) a major in an additional discipline. 

All Mathematics majors must maintain a mathematics GPA of 2.0 or higher. 
A student who does not satisfy this requirement may be dismissed from the 
major and/or prohibited from graduating with the major. A student who 
receives a C or below in MATH 233 Calculus III must have the department's 
permission to continue in the major or minor. 

MATHEMATICS MINOR REQUIREMENTS 

MATH 170 Calculus I 4 credits 
MATH 171 Calculus II 4 credits 
MATH 233 Calculus III 4 credits 
MATH 150 Linear Algebra 4 credits 
MATH 265 Transition to Advanced Mathematics 3 credits 

TWO courses from the following: 

Math 146 Programming I 4 credits 
MIS 190 Algorithms 3 credits 
MATH 201 Technical Writing with LATEX 3 credits 
MATH 240 Differential Equations 3 credits 
MATH 245 Geometry 3 credits 
MATH 280 Modern Algebra I 3 credits 
MATH 281 Modern Algebra II 3 credits 
MATH 291 Statistical Analysis 3 credits 
MATH 370 Advanced Calculus 3 credits 
PHYS 201 General Physics I & Lab 4 credits 

MATHEMATICS WITH SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATION 
PROGRAM DIRECTOR: Mr. Patrick Kelly 

The Mathematics Education program at Mercyhurst University follows a 
two-step process designed to give students strong content knowledge 
before they master the pedagogical tools necessary to become expert 
teachers at the secondary level (grades 7-12). In completing this program 
the student earns a master’s degree in addition to the completion of a 
bachelor’s degree. 

Students interested in the program will first pursue a B.A. in Mathematics by 
complying with the requirements outlined herein. Upon completion of the 
undergraduate mathematics degree, the student may then enroll in the 
Master of Science in Secondary Education: Pedagogy and Practice program 
(see Graduate Programs Catalog). Teaching certification is not earned until 
the completion of the master’s degree. 

A unique benefit of this program is that students intending to complete 
their undergraduate mathematics degree at Mercyhurst may seek 
enrollment in the 4+1 program, in which they can complete the master’s 
degree under an intensive, one-year curriculum. This 4+1 program allows 
students to earn a B.A. in Mathematics, earn an M.S. in Secondary 

Education, and become certified to teach at the secondary level, in a five-
year period. 

Students in the 4+1 program must maintain a G.P.A. of 3.0, complete a 
Sophomore Review, pass the PRAXIS I exam, and complete two education 
courses (EDUC 210 Comparative Issues in Education and WL 101 Culturally 
and Linguistically Diverse Learners) before acceptance into the graduate 
program. Each student will work with the program coordinator to 
successfully meet all of these goals during the established timeline. 

Students who have earned a mathematics degree from another institution 
will have their work evaluated against Mercyhurst’s requirements for the 

B.A. in Mathematics before being accepted into the master’s program. 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MAJOR REQUIREMENTS (BACHELOR OF 

ARTS) 
MATH 146 Programming I 4 credits 
MIS 140 Computer Operations 3 credits 
MIS 180 Linux/Operating Systems 3 credits 
MIS 190 Algorithms 3 credits 
MIS 226 Programming II 3 credits 
MIS 260 Networks 3 credits 
MIS 280 Introduction to Internet Programming 4 credits 
MIS 350 Database Management 3 credits 
MIS 370 Client-Side Programming 4 credits 
Three electives from the following 
MIS 150 Intro to Data Science 3 credits 
MIS 224 Mobile Application Dev 3 credits 
MIS 305 Game Programming 3 credits 
MIS 380 Server Side Programming 4 credits 
MATH 201 Technical Writing with LATEX 3 credits 
RIAP 325 Cyber Threat Analysis 3 credits 

An internship may be used for one or more of the above electives. 

All Information Technology majors are encouraged to pursue an additional 
minor or (preferably) an additional major in another discipline. 
All Information Technology majors must maintain a GPA in the major of 2.0 
or higher. A student who does not satisfy this requirement may be dismissed 
from the major and/or prohibited from graduating with the major. 

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MINOR 

MATH 146 Programming I 4 credits 
MIS 260 Networks 3 credits 
MIS 350 Database 

Management 3 credits 
Three Department Approved MIS electives 9 credits 
An internship may be used for one or more of the above electives. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Military Science 121 Military Science 

Military Science 

DEPARTMENT CHAIR 

LTC Daniel T. Rempfer 

FACULTY 

Professor: 

LTC Daniel T. Rempfer 

Assistant Professors: 

CPT Nelson Muniz 
CPT Michael McGraw 
CPT Anthony Aya 


Senior Military Science Instructor: 

MSG Jason DeKaye 

INTRODUCTION 

The Military Science program is open to both male and female students. 
Freshmen and sophomores incur NO OBLIGATION to the U.S. Army by 
enrolling in the ROTC Program. Those who desire to earn a commission as a 
Second Lieutenant in the United States Army, Army Reserve or Army 
National Guard must sign a contract in order to enter the junior and senior 
year of the program known as the Advanced Course. Classes for freshmen 
and sophomores are held at Mercyhurst University; juniors and seniors 
attend classes at Gannon University. Military Science classes are free of 
charge to all full-time students who earn academic credits that may be 
applied toward graduation requirements. Up to six academic credits earned 
through ROTC courses may be applied to the credits needed for graduation 
from Mercyhurst University. Students accepted to the university on 
conditional status will not be permitted to take military science courses until 
their conditional status has been removed. 

AIMS AND OBJECTIVES 

The primary purpose of the Department of Military Science is to develop the 
future officer leadership of the United States Army and to motivate young 
people to become better citizens. 

Army ROTC is one of the best leadership courses in the country. During 
classes, leadership labs, physical training and field training exercises, 
students learn firsthand what it takes to lead others, motivate groups and 
conduct missions as an Officer in the Unites States Army. 

The program objectives focus on the overall development of a student to 
lead soldiers and organizations in the 21st century. 

Students develop into leaders of tomorrow as Commissioned Officers in the 
United States Army, Army Reserve or Army National Guard. 

Students are introduced to the fundamentals of leadership with emphasis 
on loyalty, duty, respect, selfless service, honor, integrity, personal courage 
and ethics. 

Students assess the personal challenges and competencies that are critical 
for effective leadership within teams, groups and organizations through 
direction, problem solving, listening and effective communications. 

Students are challenged to explore the dimensions of creative and 
innovative tactical leadership strategies and styles within team dynamics 
through leadership attributes and competencies in relation to military 
operations. 

Students practice, study and evaluate adaptive leadership skills as they are 
presented with challenging scenarios related to squad and platoon tactical 
operations receiving feedback on their leadership attributes and actions. 

Students transition from an academic student focus to a military student 
focus by holding leadership positions with the Cadet Battalion training, 
organizing, mentoring and evaluating underclass students within the 
Military Science Program. 

PROGRAM OF INSTRUCTION 

The Department of Military Science offers both a four-year and two-year 
program of instruction. Students begin the Military Science program during 
their freshman year, but may enter as late as their junior year. 

A. FOUR-YEAR PROGRAM. This program consists of the Basic Course 
(freshman and sophomore years) and the Advanced Course (junior and 
senior years). During the Basic Course students must complete four military 
science courses (12 credit hours). These courses are designed to provide a 
general knowledge of the U.S. Army (to include career opportunities), to 
develop selected leadership traits such as poise and self-confidence, and to 
teach basic military skills. Completion of the Basic Course is required for 
entry into the Advanced Course. During the Advanced Course phase, 
students qualify for a U.S. Army commission by completing four military 
science courses (12 credit hours) and by successfully completing a Cadet 
Leadership Course (CLC) between their junior and senior academic years. 
During the school year, students in the Advanced course receive a nontaxable 
subsistence allowance of $450 per month for juniors and $500 per 
month for seniors. 
B. TWO-YEAR PROGRAM. This program allows direct entry into the 
Advanced Course via these methods: 
1) Be a Junior ROTC graduate; 
2) Attend the Leader’s Training Course/ Cadet Initial Entry Training Course (a 
four week program completed during the summer); 
3) Complete Basic Training through one of the Armed Forces. 
C. PROFESSIONAL MILITARY EDUCATION. Whether the student chooses 
the four-year or two-year program, all ROTC students must pass an 
approved American military history course prior to commissioning as a 
second lieutenant. 
FINANCIAL AID 

ROTC merit-based scholarships are available that pay full tuition and fees 
($1200 annual book fees) plus $300-$500 per month non-taxable 
subsistence allowance for ten months each school year. All four-year 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Military Science 122 Military Science 

scholarship recipients also receive a room and board incentive. Scholarships 
are available on a competitive basis to include grade point average, physical 
fitness, medical condition, and legal records. Advancing freshman and 
sophomores may compete for three and two-year scholarships respectively, 
regardless of current ROTC participation. There are also multiple scholarship 
and financial assistance opportunities through the United States Army 
Reserves and the Army National Guard specifically for ROTC. 

MILITARY SCIENCE STUDENT ACTIVITIES 

Military Science students are encouraged to participate in university and 
civic activities. Military Science students are afforded the opportunity to visit 
selected government facilities (military bases, federal law enforcement 
facilities, and medical facilities). 

The Ranger Challenge Competition, considered a varsity sport, is one of the 
most challenging activities offered through the Military Science 
Department. The 10-person team competes in various activities to include a 
physical fitness test, a 12-mile ruck march, the one-rope-bridge, a hand-
grenade assault course, and an orienteering competition. 

The color guard is a student-run organization that presents the national and 
state colors in uniform at graduations, sporting events, and other special 
functions. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


The D’Angelo Department of Music 123 The D’Angelo Department of Music 

The D’Angelo Department of Music 

DEPARTMENT CHAIR: 

Nathan Hess, D.M.A. 

FACULTY 

Professor Emeritus: 

Albert Glinsky, Ph.D. 

Associate Professors: 

Scott Meier, Ph.D. 

Assistant Professors: 

Nathan Hess, D.M.A. 

Louisa Jonason, M.M. 

Lecturer: 

Craig Stevens, MA, MT-BC, NMT 

Visiting Instructor: 

Jonathan Moser, M.M. 

Part-Time Instructor: 

Rebecca Wunch, M.M. 

Adjunct Faculty: 

Brad Amidon, MFA; Nathan Barber, M.M.; Brittany Barko, M.M.; 
James Bobick; Carolyn Borland, M.M.; Robin Hasenpflug, M.M.; Sarah 
Kahl, D.M.A.; MiKyung Kim, M.M.; Linda Kobler, ABD; Joyce Kriner, 
B.M.; Bryan Lewis, M.M.; Melany Myers, M.M.; Jonathan Nolan, M.S.; 
Hilary Philipp, M.M.; Chris Rapier, B.A.; Patrick Rose, M.M.; Lindsay 
Stickney, M.A.; Kent Tucker, B.M.; Gary Viebranz, D.M.A.; Christopher 
Von Volkenburg, M.S.; Allen Zurcher, D.A. 


Concurrent Faculty: 

Rebecca Ryan, B.A. 

INTRODUCTION 

The D’Angelo Department of Music is an accredited member of the National 
Association of Schools of Music. The Department is dedicated to assisting 
young musicians realize their potential as performing artists, educational 
leaders, and music therapists. With its distinguished faculty, the 
Department fosters musical achievement and cultural growth through its 
rigorous curriculum; its membership in the National Association for Music 
Education; its Faculty Recital Series; its numerous ensembles, productions, 
and solo performance opportunities; and by presenting special master 
classes and guest artists through its Visiting Artist Series. 

The D’Angelo Music Building is located on the south end of the campus. The 
three-level facility and was opened in September of 1988. 

In 1996, the university opened the Mary D’Angelo Performing Arts Center. 
This state-of-the-art facility adjacent to the music building showcases many 
of the performances and productions of the D’Angelo Department of Music. 
The Department also maintains the Walker Recital Hall in the Audrey Hirt 
Academic Center. This 240-seat hall serves as an additional concert and 
rehearsal space. 

MISSION STATEMENT 

The D’Angelo Department of Music strives to provide an undergraduate 
curriculum with comprehensive instruction to students seeking degrees in 
Performance, Music Education, Composition, Music Therapy, or a Bachelor of 
Arts in Music. Successful completion of these degrees will enable music 
students to take a meaningful place within their communities and assist 
them in becoming happy, healthy individuals and life-long learners in the 
arts. The Department seeks to do this within the context of a liberal arts 
university and with a deeply personalized approach to learning. We are also 
committed to encouraging enrollment in our ensembles and courses for the 
non-music major student at Mercyhurst. 

VISION OF THE DEPARTMENT 

The D’Angelo Department of Music strives to be a nationally competitive and 
well-respected institution of learning. We seek to have a student body that 
is intellectually curious, and motivated to learn in our rigorous, high-quality 
curriculum. With a faculty of visionary educators, scholars, and musicians, 
we believe our students will be challenged to achieve these high scholastic 
and artistic goals. Faculty and students work together in an atmosphere of 
professional awareness, mutual support, and outreach. As a result, our 
graduates will be versatile musicians, prepared to pursue successful, 
fulfilling careers of their choosing. 

PROGRAM STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 

Students will possess an appropriate understanding of music theory and the 
skills to properly read and compose music. 

Students will be able to identify significant events, innovations, and 
composers in the history of music and identify pieces within each major 
historical period. 

Students will exhibit a proficient level of piano performance. 

Students will attain an acceptable level of performance proficiency on their 
respective major instrument. 

Students will obtain an appreciation for and necessary skills to properly 
evaluate the musical performances of others. 

Students will grow musically and socially by participating in musical 
ensembles. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


The D’Angelo Department of Music 124 The D’Angelo Department of Music 

MUSIC MINOR—22 credits 

The D’Angelo Department of Music welcomes any student to audition as a 
Music Minor (see Audition Requirements below). You will take private 
lessons on your instrument/voice; study Music Theory, Aural Skills, and 
Music History; and participate in one of our large ensembles. Scholarships 
are also available to Minors (see Scholarships and Financial Information 
below). Credits required: 22 credits 

Large Ensemble (4 semesters, 1 cr. each) 
Applied Instrument or Piano or Voice or 

Composition (4 semesters, 1 cr. each) 
MUS 101/102 Theory I & II (6 crs.) 
MUS 111/112 Aural Skills I & II (2 crs.) 
Music History 104/105 (6 crs.) 

APPLIED MUSIC LESSON FEE 

This lesson fee applies only to certain types of students: 1) Non-music 
majors who wish to enroll in private lessons taught by department faculty, 
2) Music Minors who desire to take private lessons beyond the required two 
years, 3) Current music majors who register for lessons on a secondary 
instrument that is not part of the specific degree program. 

DESCRIPTION OF DEGREE PROGRAMS 

The D’Angelo Department of Music enrolls undergraduate students in the 
following degree programs: Bachelor of Music in Performance, Bachelor of 
Music in Music Education, Bachelor of Music in Composition, Bachelor of 
Music in Music Therapy, and Bachelor of Arts in Music. Applied study is 
offered in the following areas: Brass, Composition, Guitar, Percussion, Piano, 
Strings, Voice, and Woodwinds. A minor in music is also available to 
students from other disciplines (see Music Minor above). 

BACHELOR OF MUSIC IN PERFORMANCE 

This program emphasizes musical proficiency at a pre-professional level 
through individual instruction, mentoring, and career guidance. 
Performance experience includes large and small ensembles, solo 
performance opportunities, solo work in large-scale productions, and 
required solo recitals in the junior and senior years. 

BACHELOR OF MUSIC IN MUSIC EDUCATION 

Music Education offers students active participation in a variety of 
performance ensembles similar to those that the graduates will supervise in 
the public school environment. The methods and materials used in the 
public school classroom are covered with special focus on motivation, 
instructional technique, and classroom management skills. Students will be 
certified to teach K-12 (Band and Choral). 

BACHELOR OF MUSIC IN COMPOSITION 

This program aims to equip each young composer with the essential 
technical toolbox and broad aesthetic perspective needed to assume a place 
in the community of professional composers, and to serve as a preparation 
for high-level graduate work and a career in music. 

BACHELOR OF MUSIC IN MUSIC THERAPY 

Music Therapy is the clinical and evidence-based use of music interventions 
to accomplish individualized non-musical goals within a therapeutic 
relationship by a credentialed professional. Upon successful completion of 
the music therapy bachelor’s degree, an individual is eligible to sit for the 
national certification exam to obtain the credential Music Therapist-Board 
Certified (MT-BC), which is necessary for professional practice. 

BACHELOR OF ARTS IN MUSIC 

This program offers students the opportunity for concentrated private study 
in a particular performance discipline, while giving flexibility to pursue 
outside areas, sometimes resulting in a minor. The degree provides a solid 
grounding for later graduate study in performance, historical and theoretical 
areas of music, and the broader humanities, as well. 

ADMISSION 

In addition to the Mercyhurst University application and admission process, 
students applying to the D’Angelo Department of Music must: 

1. Complete the online Department of Music audition application. 
2. Present a performance audition. (See requirements below) 
3. Complete a Theory and Piano placement exam. 
AUDITION REQUIREMENTS (for BM Music Therapy, see below) 

Brass applicants must be prepared to play two contrasting pieces from the 
standard brass repertoire. Sight-reading may be required. Applicants may 
also be asked to play major and minor scales. 

Composition applicants will be required to show evidence of a strong 
creative ability, demonstrated through completed works. Applicants should 
submit scores, and if possible, tapes or CDs of at least two recent 
compositions. Contrast in style and media is preferred. Electronic works, and 
pieces that by their nature cannot be represented through standard 
notation, may be submitted in recorded form, without accompanying 
scores. All applicants should possess a well-developed ear and should have 
an intermediate technique on at least one instrument. 

Guitar applicants will be expected to play major and minor scales and two 
pieces of contrasting style. Sight-reading may be required. 

Percussion applicants are required to audition on snare drum and mallet 
percussion. Timpani is recommended, but not required. The applicant will 
play one solo or etude on each instrument. Sight-reading may be required. 

Piano applicants, except B.M. Performance, will perform two solo works (at 
least one must be memorized) in contrasting styles (e.g., Baroque, Classical, 
Romantic, Impressionistic, 20th/21st century) and demonstrate proficiency in 
both major and minor scales and arpeggios. Sight-reading may be required. 
Applicants for the B.M. Performance degree in Piano will perform three 
memorized solo works in contrasting styles. 

String applicants should prepare two contrasting pieces from the standard 
string repertoire. Applicants may be asked to sight-read and demonstrate 
proficiency in both major and minor scales and arpeggios. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


The D’Angelo Department of Music 125 The D’Angelo Department of Music 

Voice applicants should prepare three songs of contrasting style, to be 
performed from memory. Songs should be selected from the standard 
classical vocal literature. One of these should be in a foreign language. 

Woodwind applicants may be required to play at least two octave major and 
minor scales and arpeggios. They must be prepared to play two contrasting 
pieces from the standard woodwind repertoire. Sight-reading may be 
required. 

MUSIC THERAPY AUDITION REQUIREMENTS: 

1. Perform two pieces of contrasting style on their primary instrument. 
2. Improvise and develop a theme on primary instrument. 
3. Sing one piece in folk tradition, accompanying self on guitar or piano. 
4. Harmonize chords to familiar melody. 
5. Demonstrate ability to keep a steady pulse in various time signatures on 
percussion instrument while accompanying someone on the guitar. 
6. Demonstrate basic knowledge of I, IV, V progression in various keys on 
either the guitar or piano. 
7. Personal interview with Music Therapy faculty. 
8. Typed essay on student’s personal philosophy of music, as applied to a 
therapeutic setting. 
SCHOLARSHIPS AND FINANCIAL INFORMATION 
Majors – Talent-based scholarships are awarded at the discretion of the 
faculty and the Chair of the Department of Music through the audition 
process. Any prospective student is eligible to compete for scholarship 
assistance, regardless of financial status. Students wishing to apply for 
financial assistance must also apply to the Director of Financial Aid. Students 
who do not meet required academic and performance levels may have their 
scholarship reduced or eliminated. 

Minors – Non-music majors are accepted as music minors through the 
same audition process described above and are awarded a scholarship for 
their participation in the music department’s large ensembles. 

Non-Music Majors–Students at Mercyhurst University who wish to 
participate in the large and small ensembles are invited to do so at the 
discretion of the ensemble conductor. A limited number of scholarships are 
available through an audition process. 

SOPHOMORE REVIEW 

At the end of the sophomore year, a formal review is made by the entire 
full-time music faculty to evaluate whether the student will be retained in 
the program. Based on grades, performing progress, juries, and other 
criteria established by the faculty, the Sophomore Review must be passed 
successfully in order for the student to continue working toward a music 
degree. 

GRADUATION RECITALS 

Candidates for the Bachelor of Music degree in Performance must perform a 
half recital during the junior year and a full recital during the senior year. 

Candidates for the Bachelor of Music in Composition must present a half 
recital during the junior year and a full recital during the senior year; both 
these recitals must consist of original compositions. 


Candidates for the Bachelor of Music in Music Education degree must 
perform a half recital during the senior year. 
Candidates for the Bachelor of Music degree in Music Therapy must perform 
a half recital in the senior year. 


Candidates for the Bachelor of Arts degree in Music must perform a half 
recital in the senior year. 


STUDENT HANDBOOK 

A student handbook outlining all policies of the D’Angelo Department of 
Music is provided to all music students. It is the responsibility of the student 
to adhere to guidelines and policies set forth in the handbook. 

MUSIC CORE CURRICULUM—47 creds (55 creds for B.M. Performance 
and B.M. Composition) 

MUS101/102Theory I & II (6 creds) 
MUS104/105Music History (6 creds) 
MUS 108 Intro to Music Tech (1 creds) 
MUS 109/113 Theory/Aural Lab I & II 

(0 creds) 
MUS111/112Aural Skills I & II (2 creds) 
MUS 140/240/340/440 – 

Large Ensemble (8 creds) 
MUS150 Class Piano I (2 semesters, 4 crs; 
Piano majors exempt) 
MUS 151/251/351/451 – Applied Piano 

(8 creds for B.A. Music, B.M. Music 
Education, and B.M. Music Therapy; or 
16 creds for B.M. Performance) 


or 
MUS 160/260/360/460 – Applied Voice 

(8 creds for B.A. Music, B.M. Music 
Education, and B.M. Music Therapy; or 
16 creds for B.M. Performance) 


or 
MUS170-174/270 -274/370 -374/470 – 474 – 


Applied Instrument (8 creds for B.A. 
Music, B.M. Music Education, and B.M. 
Music Therapy; or 16 creds for B.M. 
Performance) 


or 
MUS 180/280/380/480 – Applied 

Composition (8 creds for B.A. Music, B.M. 
Music Education, and B.M. Music 
Therapy; or 16 creds for B.M. 
Composition) 


MUS190/191,290/291,390/391,490/491 

Attendance Requirement (0 creds) 
MUS 201/202 Theory III & IV (6 creds) 
MUS207 Music History – World Music and 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


The D’Angelo Department of Music 126 The D’Angelo Department of Music 

Jazz (3 creds) 
MUS 211/212 Aural Skills III & IV (2 
creds) 
MUS 499 Senior Recital (1 creds) 

DEGREE PROGRAMS (credits indicated are the total number required 
to graduate in your major) 

B.M. in PERFORMANCE—Instrumental (121 creds), Piano (126 
creds) 
REACH Curriculum 
Music Core Curriculum, plus: 
MUS 145/245/345/445 – Small Ensemble 

(8 creds) 
MUS 155/255 Accompanying 

(Piano majors only—4 total creds) 
MUS 206 Orchestral/Chamber Music History (3 creds) 
MUS 250 Class Piano II (2 semesters, 4 

creds; Piano majors exempt) 
MUS 304 Form and Analysis (3 creds) 
MUS 307 Instrumental Literature and 

Materials (Instrumental majors only, 3 
creds) 
MUS 310 Piano Pedagogy (Piano majors 
only, 3 creds) 
MUS 341 Instrumental Pedagogy 

(Instrumental majors only, 3 creds) 
MUS 384 Orchestration (3 creds) 
MUS 413 Beginning Conducting (1 creds) 
MUS 414 or 415 Adv. Conducting (1 creds) 
MUS 430 Piano Literature and 

Materials (Piano majors only, 3 creds) 
Junior Recital (0 creds) 

B.M. in PERFORMANCE—Voice (131 creds) 
REACH Curriculum 
Music Core Curriculum, plus: 
MUS 145/245/345/445 – Opera Workshop 

(8 creds) 
MUS 206 Orchestral/ Chamber Music 

History (3 creds) 
MUS 250 Class Piano II (2 sem., 4 creds) 
MUS 281/282 Diction for Singers (4 creds) 
MUS 304 Form and Analysis (3 creds) 
MUS 350 Adv. Secondary Piano (2 sem., 2 

creds total) 
MUS 401/402 Vocal Literature and 

Materials (6 creds) 
MUS 413 Beginning Conducting (1 creds) 
MUS 415 Adv. Choral Conducting (1creds) 
Junior Recital (0 creds) 
FREN 101/102 (6 creds) 

B.M. in COMPOSITION (125 creds) 
REACH Curriculum 
Music Core Curriculum, plus: 
MUS 145-445 Composers Workshop (8 

creds) 
MUS 206 Orchestral/ Chamber Music 

History (3 creds) 
MUS 250 Class Piano II (2 sem. 4 creds) 
MUS 304 Form and Analysis (3 creds) 
MUS 230/246; MUS 330/346: Instrumental 

Techniques as part of Educational Methods and 
Techniques: Strings, Woodwinds, Brass, and 
Percussion (8 creds) 


MUS 384 Orchestration (3 creds) 
MUS 413 Beginning Conducting (1 creds) 
MUS 415 Adv. Instr. Conducting (1 creds) 
Junior Recital (0 creds) 
MUS 499 Senior Recital (1 creds) 


B.M. in MUSIC EDUCATION—Instrumental/Voice/Composition (143 
creds), Piano (138 creds) 
REACH Curriculum 
Music Core Curriculum, plus: 
MUS 110 Introduction to 

Music Education (3 creds) 
MUS 145/245/345/445 – Small Ensemble 
(Instrumental and Voice: 7 sem., 2 creds 
total; Piano: 7 sem., 6 creds total) 
MUS 230/246 Methods and Techniques 
(6 creds) 
MUS 250 Class Piano II (Piano majors 
exempt: 2 sem. 4 creds) 
MUS 321 Elementary General 
Methods (2 creds) 
MUS 322 Secondary General Methods 
(2 creds) 
MUS 330/346 Educational Methods and 

Techniques (6 creds) 
MUS 334 Marching Band Tech (1 creds) 
MUS 413 Beginning Conducting (1 creds) 
MUS 414 or MUS 415 Advanced Conducting 

(1 creds) 
WL 101 Cultural and Diverse Learners (3 

creds REACH) 
MATH Second Math course (3 creds) 
ESPE 101 Psychology of Diverse Learners 

(3 creds) 
ESPE 201 Inclusive Practices (3 creds) 
ESPE 301 Supporting Literacy (3 creds) 
EDUC 210 Comparative Issues (3 creds) 
EDUC 473 Clinical I Seminar (2 creds) 
EDUC 474 Clinical Secondary Ed (3 creds) 
EDUC 475 Student Teaching (12 creds) 

NOTE: CERTIFICATION in Education 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


The D’Angelo Department of Music 127 The D’Angelo Department of Music 

In order to receive the degree and certification in music education, all 
candidates must meet all the requirements outlined in the Education 
department section of the university catalog. Please refer to all standards, 
policies and admissions/retention criteria specified for all education majors 
seeking a degree from Mercyhurst University and certification by the 
Pennsylvania Department of Education. 

B.A. in MUSIC (121 creds) 
REACH Curriculum 
Music Core Curriculum, plus: 
MUS 206 Orchestral/ Chamber Music 

History (3 creds) 
MUS 499 Senior Recital (1 creds) 

B.M. in MUSIC THERAPY (121 creds) 
REACH Curriculum 
Music Core Curriculum, plus: 
MUS 156 Class Guitar for Music Therapy 

(2 sem., 2 creds total) 
MUS 159 Class Voice for Music Therapy 

(2 sem., 2 creds total) 
MUS 338 Percussion Techniques (2 creds) 
MUS 499 Senior Recital (1 creds) 
MUTH 101 Music Therapy Foundations (3 

creds) 
MUTH 102 Clinical Musicianship/Song 

Writing (2 creds) 
MUTH 103 Psychology of Music (2 creds) 
MUTH 104 Clinical Experience I (2 creds) 
MUTH 201 Special Populations (3 creds) 
MUTH 204 Clinical Experience II (2 creds) 
MUTH 304 Clinical Experience III (2 creds) 
MUTH473 Internship (0 creds) 
PSYC 211 Abnormal Psychology (3 creds) 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Philosophy 128 Philosophy 

Philosophy 

DEPARTMENT CHAIR 

James Snyder, Ph.D. 

FACULTY 

Associate Professors: 

Thomas Donahue, Ph.D. 
James Snyder, Ph.D. 
Kevin Sullivan, Ph.D., Co-Director of the Evelyn Lincoln Institute for 
Ethics and Society 


INTRODUCTION 

Philosophy, the search for truth and wisdom, explores foundational human 
questions in logic, epistemology, metaphysics, ethics, aesthetics, language, 
religion, science, public policy and law. 

The department works closely with students to help tailor their education to 
meet their interests and goals. All majors are required to complete a senior 
capstone project, usually taking the form of a directed senior thesis based on 
independent study. The Philosophy Department co-sponsors the Evelyn 
Lincoln Institute for Ethics and Society and it hosts the Charlene M. Tanner 
Speaker Series. The department houses a chapter of Sigma Tau Delta (the 
national honor society for philosophy), has a student-run Philosophy Club, 
and encourages majors and minors to participate in undergraduate 
philosophy conferences and to publish in national student journals. 

Many of our students are double majors and see philosophy as their 
secondary major, which we strongly encourage and support. The 
philosophy minor is a very attractive complement to most of the university’s 
majors and is perfect for anyone who loves the life of the mind. The 
Philosophy Department regularly offers upper level elective courses that 
cater to interests in other majors, such as Religious Studies, Political Science, 
Psychology, and Art and Graphic Design, and the department’s faculty 
members are often involved in various interdisciplinary courses. 

MISSION STATEMENT 

The Philosophy Department plays a crucial role in the fulfillment of the 
university’s mission, offering a major and a minor and contributing courses 
to the university’s REACH curriculum. In both endeavors, the Philosophy 
Department’s goal is to educate and train the next generation of individuals 
to achieve personal, professional, and civic success by cultivating the 
intellectual skills and abilities of effective communication, critical thinking, 
creative thinking, and ethical reasoning. The philosophy major is designed 
to prepare students for professional and graduate study in philosophy or 
some allied field, such as law or political science. The development of these 
skills in our majors is facilitated by the following tenets: 

A student-centered approach to learning and inquiry. The Department 
works closely with students to help tailor their education to meet their 
interests and goals. In addition to completing the core curriculum of the 
major, which consists of 6 courses, all majors are required to take 7 electives, 
at least one of which is expected to be an independent study. 

Historical breadth & conceptual depth. This focuses on knowledge of the 
history of philosophy and the core philosophical concepts and principles that 
constitute the foundation of all philosophical and scientific discovery and 
criticism. 

Experiential learning. Students regularly work as research assistants for 
faculty engaged in scholarship in philosophy or some allied field. 

Original research. Students choose and work closely with a thesis advisor on 
an independent research project, which culminates in a departmental thesis 
defense. 

STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 

Effective communication (written and oral communication appropriate to 
the field of philosophy) 

Substantive Knowledge (the main problems of philosophy, terminology, 
periods, movements and schools of thought) 

Critical Thinking (understand and use logical reasoning to interpret, analyze 
and criticize the ideas, beliefs, values, and practices of individuals and 
groups) 

Creative Thinking (Construct authentic, persuasive, and interdisciplinary 
arguments in support of personal beliefs, values and practices) 

Ethical Reasoning (understand and use ethical terms, principles, theories 
and methods to engage and solve personal problems and broad social 
issues) 

THE MAJOR (BACHELOR OF ARTS) REQUIREMENTS 

This program is intended for students who desire to major in philosophy at 
the undergraduate level and prepare for and pursue a graduate degree in 
philosophy at the masters or doctoral level. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Philosophy 129 Philosophy 

The professional major provides students with enhanced mentoring for 
professional development, guidance through the graduate school 
application process, increased breadth and depth of substantive knowledge 
through additional coursework, increased specialization through an 
emphasis on independent study and directed research, and an increased 
focus on professional writing within the discipline through its required 
senior thesis, all of which are expectations for students entering graduate 
school. (39 Credits) 

PHIL 100 Philosophical Inquiry 3 credits 
PHIL 101 Introduction to Logic 3 credits 
PHIL 260 History of Philosophy to the Renaissance 3 credits 
PHIL 261 History of Philosophy Since the 3 credits 
Renaissance 
PHIL 401 Applied Ethics 3 credits 
PHIL 460 Senior Thesis 3 credits 

Seven (7) Electives in Philosophy 

PHILOSOPHY MINOR 

This program of study is intended for students who are passionate about 
philosophy as a subject and who want the benefits of the formal study of 
philosophy but whose academic or professional schedules cannot 
accommodate the more substantial requirements of the professional or 
double majors. 
(18 Credits) 

PHIL 100 Philosophical Inquiry 3 credits 
PHIL 101 Introduction to Logic 3 credits 
PHIL 260 History of Philosophy to the Renaissance 3 credits 
OR 
PHIL 261 History of Philosophy Since the 3 credits 

Renaissance 
PHIL 401 Applied Ethics Internship 3 credits 
Two (2) Electives in Ethics 

In addition to the department's regularly offered courses for majors and 
minors listed in the course descriptions, students can elect to take 
independent study courses at the 200, 300 and 400 levels in order to meet 
their major or minor requirements. An independent study is a unique 
opportunity for a student to work closely with a faculty member in a field or 
on a topic of their interest. Recent independent studies have included: 

PHIL 315 Philosophy of Mind 3 credits 
PHIL 315 Philosophy of Climate Change 3 credits 
PHIL 315 Environmental Philosophy 3 credits 
PHIL 320 Philosophy of Science 3 credits 
PHIL 340 Metaphysics 3 credits 
PHIL 350 Analytic Philosophy 3 credits 
PHIL 370 Phenomenology 3 credits 
PHIL 410 Social and Political Philosophy 3 credits 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Physics & Astronomy 130 Physics & Astronomy 

Physics & Astronomy 

DEPARTMENT CHAIR 

Dyan L. Jones, Ph.D. 

FACULTY 
Associate Professors: 


Ronald Brown, Ph.D. 

Clinton Jones, Ph.D. 

Dyan L. Jones, Ph.D. 

Assistant Professor: 

Joseph Johnson, Ph.D. 

Lecturer: 

Paul Ashcraft, M.S., ABD 

Adjunct: 

Tom DiVecchio 

INTRODUCTION 

The study of physics is essential to every other natural science because it 
informs how all of the processes in the world work. As such, these physics 
courses are offered in the spirit of exposing students to the fundamentals of 
physics and highlighting the applications to other areas of science such as 
chemistry, biology, and health sciences. 

Along with the basic science, physics courses will offer students the 
opportunity to develop their critical reasoning and problem solving skills. A 
natural outcome of these courses is an increased capacity to tackle new and 
challenging problems in a variety of contexts and disciplines. 

Both the B.S. and the B.A. Physics programs focus on the quantitative and 
analytic skills needed to solve problems and interpret data. Students who 
major in Physics will be prepared to worn on cutting-edge ideas in science 
and technology, academic, government and the private sector, or graduate 
school in nearly any STEM area. 

A physics minor program is currently available, and flexible enough to 
accommodate a student in any of the STEM disciplines. This minor, gives 
students a distinct advantage over their peers in graduate school or the 
work force and provides students an opportunity to study advanced and 
cutting-edge physics. 

MISSION STATEMENT 

The Mercyhurst University Department of Physics seeks to provide a high-
quality physics education that prepares students to be the scientists of the 
future, confident in their abilities and their understanding of 
physics. Because we believe that simple factual knowledge is not sufficient, 
the department seeks to instill strong analytical and critical thinking skills in 
our students. To meet these skills, our department is centered on the 
following tenets: 
A student-centered approach within our Department. We believe that 
students are able to flourish when they are the center of the learning 
process. In particular, we place an emphasis on achieving close student-
faculty relationships. 

A focus on scientific inquiry at all levels in the curriculum. We believe that 
students are most successful when they engage in the scientific process to 
the fullest extent. Inquiry-based learning is infused in all of our scholarly 
pursuits, from experimentation design through communication with the 
scientific community. 

A commitment to promoting diversity in the sciences. By placing an 
emphasis on mentoring and diversity in the faculty, we seek to support 
students from all backgrounds and levels of experience, including those 
traditionally under-represented. 

A dedication to standards of excellence. We believe that success in 
scientific disciplines requires fulfillment of a clear set of academic 
standards, and we strive to ensure that all students meet these 
standards. Through guidance and mentoring, we strive to provide every 
student with the opportunity for success. 

A belief in developing the whole person. We believe that a dedication to 
lifelong learning, the ability to communicate effectively both orally and in 
writing, and a desire to contribute to the science community and society at 
large are essential characteristics of ethical professionals and socially 
conscientious citizens. 

Along with our major courses, we also strive to provide students with a 
liberal arts background that contributes to a well-rounded 
academic. Students in any of our courses should acquire the foundational 
knowledge necessary to be successful in their field and as thoughtful 
citizens. Our graduates should have the expertise and competence in 
physics to be prepared for advanced study in the physical sciences and/or 
for employment. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Physics & Astronomy 131 Physics & Astronomy 

PROGRAM STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 

Mastery of fundamental physics principles 
Students will show proficiency at solving quantitative problems that 
require an understanding of the fundamental principles in each of the 
major areas of physics. 

Students will show proficiency at explaining qualitatively the broad 
array of physical phenomena that can be explained using these 
fundamental concepts. 

Application of previously learned information in new contexts 
Students will show proficiency at transferring fundamental principles 
into the advanced study in physics areas such as classical mechanics, 
electrodynamics, thermodynamics, and quantum mechanics. 

Demonstration of proficiency in scientific methods of inquiry 
Students can design and carry out simple experiments including the 
collection, analysis, and presentation of meaningful data. 

Acquisition of professional skills 
Students can complete a literature review including the ability to read 
and use scientific literature. 

Students can present well-organized, logical and scientifically sound 
oral and written scientific reports. 

Recognition of the broader implications of an education in physics 
Students demonstrate an awareness of the impact of physics in social, 
economical and environmental issues. 

Students value both independent study and teamwork, as well as hold 
an appreciation for life-long learning. 

DEPARTMENT REQUIREMENTS 

All prerequisite coursework must be completed with a grade of C or better in 
order for a student to be eligible to enroll in a course. If this requirement has 
not been met prior to the start of the semester during which a student is 
enrolled, students will be removed from the course where the prerequisites 
have not been satisfactorily met. To be recommended for graduation, a 
student must earn at least a 2.5 grade point average in the required major 
and cognate courses and labs. When a course is re-taken the GPA 
requirement includes both the original grade and the grade from the retake. 
A student also must earn a grade of a C or better in any course from the 
major discipline that is to fulfill a degree requirement. No required course 
may be taken on a Pass/Fail basis. No required courses may be taken at 
another institution without prior approval. 

Students are required to take theory and lab courses concurrently unless 
permission is granted from both the instructor and the department. 
Withdrawal from one without withdrawal from the other is not allowed 
without permission from both the instructor and the department. 

All students seeking degrees in programs offered by the Physics Department 
are required to undergo a review by department faculty at the completion of 
their sophomore year or at the completion of their sophomore level 
requirements. Students must successfully complete the Sophomore Review 
in order to be accepted into the Department’s programs and to continue 
their physics studies. Students eligible for review are those who have been 
enrolled at Mercyhurst for at least 2 years, and must have completed or be 
in the process of completing Calculus II, General Physics II, Chemistry II, and 
at least one upper-level physics course (numbered 300 or higher). 
Acceptance to the program will be based on academic performance in the 
department and at the University as a whole as well as professional conduct. 
Students who do not pass the Sophomore Review will not be allowed to 
enroll in any further courses required for Physics programs. 

Students seeking a B.S. must also sign up with a Research Advisor before 
Nov. 1 of the academic year in which they intend to graduate. 

PHYSICS MAJOR BACHELOR OF SCIENCE DEGREE REQUIREMENTS 

All students seeking a Bachelor of Science (B.S.) degree in physics are 
required to take the following courses. 

MATH 170 Calculus I 4 credits 
MATH 171 Calculus II 4 credits 
MATH 233 Calculus III 4 credits 
MATH 150 Linear Algebra 3 credits 
MATH 240 Differential Equations Credits 
CHEM 121/122 General Chemistry I and Lab 4 credits 
CHEM 131/132 General Chemistry II and Lab 4 credits 
PHYS 200 Freshman Seminar Credits 
PHYS 201/203 General Physics I and Lab 4 credits 
PHYS 202/206 General Physics II and Lab 4 credits 
PHYS 310/312 Modern Physics and Lab 4 credits 
PHYS 330 Thermal Physics 3 credits 
PHYS 335 Optics 3 credits 
PHYS 350 Mechanics I 3 credits 
PHYS 360 Electromagnetism 3 credits 
PHYS 420 Quantum Mechanics 3 credits 
PHYS 450 Senior Research Project 3 credits 

Student are also required to choose at least two approved physics Major 
electives, with at least one course must be a 300 level course or higher. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Physics & Astronomy 
132 Physics & Astronomy 

PHYSICS MAJOR BACHELOR OF ARTS DEGREE REQUIREMENTS 

All students seeking a Bachelor of Science (B.A.) degree in physrequired to take the following course. 

MATH 170 Calculus I 4 credits 
MATH 171 Calculus II 4 credits 
MATH 240 Differential Equations 3 credits 
CHEM 121/122 General Chemistry I 4 credits 
and Lab 
CHEM 131/132 General Chemistry II 4 credits 
and Lab 
PHYS 200 Freshman Seminar credits 
PHYS 201/203 General Physics I and 4 credits 
Lab 
PHYS 202/206 General Physics II and 4 credits 
Lab 
PHYS 310/312 Modern Physics and 4 credits 
Lab 
PHYS 330 Thermal Physics 3 credits 
PHYS 335 Optics 3 credits 
PHYS 350 Mechanics 3 credits 
PHYS 360 Electromagnetism 3 credits 

Students are also required to choose at least one approved physics 
Major elective course. 

PHYSICS MINOR 

ics are 
All students pursuing a Physics minor must take the following courses: 
MATH 170 Calculus I 4 credits 
MATH 171 Calculus II 4 credits 
PHYS 201 General Physics I 3 credits 
PHYS 203 General Physics I Lab 1 credit 
PHYS 202 General Physics II 3 credits 
PHYS 206 General Physics II Lab 1 credit 
PHYS 310 Modern Physics 3 credits 
Students must also choose two approved physics minor elective courses. 

Students who wish to earn the minor will be required to earn at least a "C" 
in every course and to maintain a 2.5 GPA overall in their minor courses. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Political Science 133 Political Science 

Political Science 

DEPARTMENT CHAIR 

Michael P. Federici, Ph.D. 

FACULTY 

Professors 

Randy S. Clemons, D.A. 
Associate Dean, Ridge College of Intelligence Studies and Applied 
Sciences 
Michael Federici, Ph.D. 
Brian D. Ripley, Ph.D. 


Associate Professor 

Joseph M. Morris, D.A., Director of the Mercyhurst Center 
for Applied Politics 

INTRODUCTION 

The Political Science major is designed to prepare students for graduate 
school, law school, and careers such as journalism, teaching, foreign service, 
public policy and public administration. In addition to the standard political 
science major, the department offers four concentrations: Pre-Law, 
International Relations, Applied Politics, and Environmental Politics. 

The department works closely with students, each of whom chooses their 
advisor. They meet each semester with their advisor to schedule classes for 
the following semester, discuss internships, and, in the spring semester, 
complete a “spring review.” All majors are required (unless waived by the 
department) to complete an internship, study abroad program, or another 
department-approved experience. The department has an active chapter of 
Pi Sigma Alpha (the national political science honor society), a Model UN 
Club, a pre-law society, and other activities. For more information visit our 
webpage at mercyhurst.edu/polisci. 

MISSION STATEMENT 

We seek to foster life skills such as reading, writing, persuading, negotiating 
and presenting; ability to think spatially; understanding of numerical data; 
historical awareness; international, cross-and multi-cultural appreciation. 
These life skills include an understanding of how political scientists think, 
gather evidence, process data, and reach tentative conclusions. Graduates 
will also develop an ability to think critically about political phenomena and 
thought. They should be effectively prepared for the worlds of work (formal 
employment in the labor market) and citizenship (civic and community life) 
as well as having a solid academic background for those inclined to pursue 
graduate studies or a law degree. Thus, specific career plans and interests 
aside, they should be well prepared to comprehend and interact with the 
political world. 

As liberal arts college graduates with a particular interest in politics, they 
should receive enough in-depth training and a wide enough breadth of 

perspectives to follow their own inclinations to interact politically with that 
world whether as “simply” citizens, professional business men and women, 
journalists, lawyers, interest group participants, active electoral 
involvement, government or private sector analysts, or academic political 
scientists. We attempt to reveal the importance and personal impact of 
political events and issues; and, more significantly, we seek to equip them to 
be able to understand, evaluate, and potentially shape the political events, 
actions and problems/solutions of the future. 

These are crucial components of a liberal arts education and, along with 
knowledge of politics and government, key components of the sort of civic 
education on which democracy depends. 

PROGRAM STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 

Upon completion of the political science program, including any of its 
concentrations, graduates will be able to: 

Demonstrate knowledge of foundational and contemporary political science 
theories; apply theoretical approaches to data analysis and practical 
experiences. 

Demonstrate knowledge of relevant political science methodologies; apply 
relevant models of inquiry to data gathering and analysis. 

Demonstrate knowledge of the institutions and processes associated with 
governance and apply this knowledge to historical and contemporary 
events. 

Demonstrate the ability to think critically, which includes identifying and 
explaining issues, recognizing concepts and assumptions, acknowledging 
multiple perspectives, and evaluating evidence to reach conclusions. 

Demonstrate written and oral communication skills expected of a 
professional in the field. 

Demonstrate knowledge of, and preparation for graduate education and 
careers associated with the field of political science. 

DEGREE REQUIREMENTS for a BA in POLITICAL SCIENCE 

Each spring the academic progress of students is reviewed in addition to 
course scheduling and regular advising. All Political Science majors and 
minors meet with faculty to discuss progress toward graduation, plans after 
graduation, student concerns, and other academic matters (e.g., minors, 
double majors, honors status, writing skills). Students whose performance is 
unsatisfactory are placed on probation or dis-enrolled from the major. 
Students who are excelling will receive commendations. An overall 2.5 GPA 
is required for admission to the major and minor. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Political Science 134 Political Science 

There are eight (8) required courses, as well as seven (7) elective courses 
that must be completed in the major. A 2.5 G.P.A. must be maintained in 

the major. 
POLI 100 American Government 3 credits 
POLI 325 Introduction to Public Administration 3 credits 
POLI 411 Seminar: Contemporary Issues in 3 credits 
Politics 
POLI 437 Political Science Project 3 credits 

Choose ONE of the following courses: 
POLI 334 International Relations 3 credits 
POLI 335 American Foreign Policy 3 credits 
Choose ONE of the following courses: 
POLI 491 American Presidency 3 credits 
POLI 492 American Congress 3 credits 
POLI 300 State and Local Politics 3 credits 
Choose ONE of the following courses: 
POLI 301 American Political Thought 3 credits 
POLI/PHIL 400 Political Theory 3 credits 
Choose ONE of the following courses: 
POLI 290 Research Methods in Social Science 3 credits 
POLI/SOC 330 Statistics in Social Science 3 credits 
AND any 7 Political Science Electives 
Pre-approved off-campus study and pre-approved cognate courses from 
other disciplines may be used to fulfill political science elective courses 

POLITICAL SCIENCE PRE-LAW CONCENTRATION 

While students can attend law school after completing a range of majors, a 
plurality of law students majored in political science as undergraduates. The 
combination of skills (e.g., writing, critical thinking, analytical) and course 
content prepare political science students for the challenges of law school. 
Since 1993 our students have been accepted to dozens of law schools across 
the nation. Pre-Law students are designated as such on their degree and 
college transcript. 

The department has a pre-law advisor who helps students select courses 
and internships that will prepare them for the law school application 
process and the academic challenge of law school. Pre-law students are 
encouraged to join the Pre-Law Society and complete the standard political 
science major while focusing their elective classes from the following list: 

POLI 421 Constitutional Law 3 credits 
POLI 422 Civil Liberties 3 credits 
POLI 225 American Legal Process 3 credits 
POLI 321 Environmental Law 3 credits 
POLI/CRJS 322 Legal Research and Writing 3 credits 
PHIL/POLI 360 Philosophy of Law 3 credits 
BADM 260 International Law 3 credits 
BADM 310 Business Law I 3 credits 
BADM 325 Business Law II 3 credits 
PHIL 101 Introduction to Logic 3 credits 
PSYC 240 Psychology and the Law 3 credits 
SOC/CRJS 337 Sociology of Law 3 credits 

INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS CONCENTRATION 

The International Relations (IR) concentration in political science addresses a 
significant need in an era of globalization. Mercyhurst students can 
specialize in international relations, focus on courses most relevant to this 
field, and graduate with a diploma that identifies IR as their chosen field of 
study. The innovative curriculum, which emphasizes international politics 
and regional political systems, is enhanced by versatile study abroad 
opportunities and a competitive Model International Organizations program 
focused on diplomacy and global problem solving. Students who select the 
IR concentration are preparing for a variety of careers, including diplomacy, 
academia, journalism, public service, or work with the vast array of nongovernmental 
organizations engaged in advocacy and service around the 
world. A large percentage of Mercyhurst political science graduates pursue 
graduate school, and those seeking an IR program will be well prepared 
upon completion of the IR track at Mercyhurst. Alumni in school and those 
currently working for the government at home and abroad, as well as for 
non-profits and businesses, are testimony to the quality of preparation 
received. The marketable skills at the center of this concentration include 
proficiency in research and analysis, the ability to read critically, an 
appreciation of diverse and complex views, an enhanced understanding of 
world events and the conditions that influence them, plus an interest in 
different cultures and societies. For successful completion of the IR 
Concentration, students must take 15 three-credit courses (9 required and 6 
electives). Students will work with their advisor to plan their specific 
program. 

Required Political Science Courses: 

POLI 100 American Government 3 credits 
POLI 303 Geopolitics 3 credits 
POLI 336 International Organizations and 3 credits 
Diplomacy 
POLI 105 Global Issues 3 credits 
POLI 290 Research Method I n Social Science 3 credits 
POLI 437 Political Science Project 3 credits 
Choose ONE of the following courses: 
POLI 334 International Relations 3 credits 
POLI 335 American Foreign Policy 3 credits 
Choose TWO of the following courses: 
POLI 240 Comparative Politics: Africa 3 credits 
POLI 241 Comparative Politics: Asia 3 credits 
POLI 242 Comparative Politics: Europe 3 credits 
POLI 243 Comparative Politics: Latin America 3 credits 
POLI 244 Comp Politics: Countries at Crossroads 3 credits 
POLI 302 Politics of Russia 3 credits 
Required Political Science electives (Choose SIX) 
POLI/HIST 224 The Vietnam War 3 credits 
POLI 236 World Politics 3 credits 
POLI 307 Nationalism 3 credits 
POLI/RIAP 213 Intelligence and National Security 3 credits 
POLI 334 International Relations 3 credits 
POLI 335 American Foreign Policy 3 credits 
POLI 337 Foreign Policy Decisions 3 credits 
POLI 380 Politics of the Global Economy 3 credits 
POLI/PHIL 400 Political Theory 3 credits 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Political Science 135 Political Science 

Any other 3-credit Political Science course (limit two) 
Other Requirements: At least two foreign language courses. 


APPLIED POLITICS CONCENTRATION 

The concentration in Applied Politics is designed to prepare students for 
careers in the fast-paced and exciting world of campaigns and elections, 
lobbying, issue advocacy, public service, and political activism. The 
concentration combines the political science core curriculum, which includes 
classes from the major sub-fields of the discipline, with courses, internships 
and technical training necessary for a successful career in politics. As its 
name implies, the concentration in Applied Politics is a hands-on learning 
experience where students are engaged in real-world politics beginning 
their very first semester at Mercyhurst. These active learning experiences 
include, but are not limited to working in the Mercyhurst Center for Applied 
Politics, which is a state-of-the art public opinion polling facility. 

POLI 100 American Government 3 credits 
POLI 325 Introduction to Public Administration 3 credits 
POLI 411 Seminar: Contemporary Issues in Politics 3 credits 
POLI 437 Political Science Project 3 credits 

Choose ONE of the following courses: 
POLI 334 International Relations 3 credits 
POLI 335 American Foreign Policy 3 credits 
Choose ONE of the following courses: 
POLI 491 American Presidency 3 credits 
POLI 492 American Congress 3 credits 
POLI 300 State and Local Politics 3 credits 
Choose ONE of the following courses: 
POLI 301 American Political Thought 3 credits 
POLI/PHIL 400 Political Theory 3 credits 
Choose ONE of the following courses: 
POLI 290 Research Methods in Social Science 3 credits 
POLI/SOC 330 Statistics in Social Science 3 credits 
Required Political Science electives (Choose 7) 
POLI 220 Campaigns, Strategy, and U.S. Elections 3 credits 
POLI 290 Research Methods in Social Science 3 credits 
POLI 311 Media and Politics 3 credits 
POLI 315 Public Opinion, Polling and Voting in 3 credits 

American Elections 
POLI 317 Political Psychology 3 credits 
POLI 475/476 Internship 3-6 credits 
Any other 3-credit Political Science or cognate course (limit three) 

ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES AND POLITICS 
CONCENTRATION 

The Environmental Studies and Politics concentration is geared toward 
environmental policy and policymaking, not environmental science. This 
makes it a perfect fit for students who are interested in graduate study in 
environmental policy and/or law, or careers such as environmental 
consulting, lobbying, journalism, or teaching. The curriculum combines the 
political science core curriculum, which includes classes from the major subfields 
of the discipline, with the courses and internships necessary for a 
successful career in this field. 

Required Political Science Courses: 

POLI 100 American Government 3 credits 

POLI 325 Introduction to Public Administration 3 credits 
POLI 395 Environmental Politics 3 credits 
POLI 202 Contemporary Environmental Issues 3 credits 
POLI/HIST 229 Environmental History of U.S. 3 credits 
POLI 290 Research Methods in Social Science 3 credits 
POLI 321 Environmental Law 3 credits 
POLI 437 Political Science Project 3 credits 

ONE of the following courses: 
POLI 334 International Relations 3 credits 
POLI 335 American Foreign Policy 3 credits 
ONE of the following courses: 
POLI 491 American Presidency 3 credits 
POLI 492 American Congress 3 credits 
POLI 300 State and Local Politics 3 credits 
ONE of the following: 
POLI 301 American Political Thought 3 credits 
POLI/PHIL 400 Political Theory 3 credits 
ELECTIVES: 
Any three political science or cognate courses approved by advisor 

SOCIAL STUDIES EDUCATION PRECERTIFICATION PROGRAM 

This program enables students to graduate as a History major while 
completing their content area requirements for Pennsylvania teacher 
certification in Social Studies. Students apply for the fifth year M.S. in 
Secondary Education following graduation. In addition to earning a Master 
of Science degree in Secondary Education at the end of their fifth year, they 
will also be certified to teach Social Studies in grades 7 through 12. Students 
intending to pursue the Social Studies certification must apply to the 
master’s program through the Education Department during their senior 
year. More details on this fifth-year curriculum can be found in the Graduate 
Program Catalog. Along with the content area courses students should take 
the PRAXIS I National Teacher Exam, EDUC 210 Comparative Issues in 
Education, and WL 101 Culturally & Linguistically Diverse Learners at any 
time in their junior or senior year. In order to gain admission into the 
master’s program, students must have achieved a grade point average 3.0 
or better in their undergraduate degree as mandated by the Pennsylvania 
Department of Education, and secured the necessary state and national 
clearances as outlined in the Education Department section of this catalog. 

SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT AREA REQUIREMENTS 

In addition to completing all of the requirements of a Political Science 
major, all students pursuing the 4+1 Social Studies pre-certification 
program must also complete a History minor and, in consultation with their 
advisor, some additional content area courses: 
PSYC 101 Introduction to Psychology 3 credits 
SOC 100 Introduction to Sociology 3 credits 
ECON 105 Macroeconomics 3 credits 
ANTH 112 World Cultures 3 credits 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Political Science 136 Political Science 

POLITICAL SCIENCE MINOR 

A student must achieve a 2.5 GPA in seven political science courses 
(including American Government) to be certified to graduate with a Political 
Science minor. 

REQUIREMENTS: 

Poli 100 American Government 3 credits 
Six (6) additional political science courses. 18 credits 

INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND DIPLOMACY MINOR 

This new minor is housed in the Political Science Department, but allows for 
utilization of some cognate courses from other departments, depending on 
the student’s interests, major(s), and university REACH course selections. 

I. Required Foundational Course (3 credits): 
POLI 336 International Organizations & Diplomacy 3 credits 
II. Comparative Government/Area courses Choose 2 of the following Courses 
(6 credits) 
POLI 240 Comparative Politics: Africa 3 credits 
POLI 241 Comparative Politics: Asia 3 credits 
POLI 242 Comparative Politics: Europe 3 credits 
POLI 243 Comparative Politics: Latin America 3 credits 
POLI 302 Politics of Russia 3 credits 
POLI 344 Comparative Politics: Countries at 3 credits 
Crossroads (recommended to be taken 
after POLI 240, 241, 242, or 243) 

III. International Relations Courses Choose 3 of the following Courses (9 
credits) 
POLI 303 Geopolitics (recommended to be taken in 3 credits 
junior year) 
POLI 335 American Foreign Policy 3 credits 
POLI 334 International Relations 3 credits 
POLI 105 Global Issues (recommended to be taken in 3 credits 

freshman year) 
POLI 232/HIST The Vietnam War 3 credits 
232 
POLI 236 World Politics (recommended to be taken 3 credits 

in freshman year) 
POLI 246 Political Cinema 3 credits 
POLI 305 Nationalism 3 credits 
POLI/RIAP2313 Intelligence and National Security 3 credits 
POLI 380 Politics of the Global Economy 3credits 
POLI 290 Research Methods in Social Science 3 credits 

IV. Any two other Political Science courses (or pre-approved cognate courses 
from another department) including all courses listed above not used 
previously (6 credits) 
Other Requirements: 
Foreign language competency at 3rd level 
Up to 15 credits may come from courses that fulfill university REACH 
requirements. 
The departmental minor advisor, in consultation with the student, may 
allow preapproved courses from other departments to fulfill category IV, for 
example, a REACH course such a Macroeconomics. And, all Political Science 
courses (e.g., American Government, Political Theory, Public Administration, 

Political Psychology, Senior Project Course, and Internships) can be used to 
fulfill Category IV. 

Students who have not lived outside the United States are strongly 
encouraged to avail themselves of our Study Abroad opportunities—but 
this is not a requirement. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Pre-Law Minor 137 Pre-Law Minor 

Pre-Law Minor 

INTRODUCTION 

Mercyhurst University offers an interdisciplinary Pre-Law minor to students 
in any major who may be considering law school. The goal of the minor is to 
help students determine if law school is the right choice for them and to 
help them prepare for law school by exposing them to some fundamental 
area of study. The minor allows for flexibility in course selection so that 
students are able to focus on their specific areas of interest, while at the 
same time build a foundation that will help them succeed in law school. The 
minor can be declared at any time during a student’s matriculation. 

The American Bar Association (ABA) does not recommend any one particular 
major or area of study for students who wish to go on to law school. 
However, the ABA does recommend several core skills and values that build 
a “sound foundation for a legal education.” These core skills and values 
include the following: 

1. Analytic/Problem Solving Skills 
2. Critical Reading 
3. Writing Skills 
4. Oral Communication/Listen ability 
5. General Research Skills 
6. Task Organization/Management Skills 
7. Public Service and Promotion of Justice 
MINOR REQUIREMENTS 

Based on these ABA recommendations, students are required to take six 
courses (18 credits) that teach these core skills and values, or cover some 
topical areas dealt with in law school. Students are required to take the 
following three courses: 
CRJS/POLI 322 Legal Research & Writing 3 credits 
CRJS 310 Constitutional Law in Criminal Proceedings 3 credits 
OR 
POLI 422 Civil Liberties 3 credits 
BADM 310 Business Law I 3 credits 

Students work with a pre-law advisor to choose the additional three 
courses. The additional courses must cover some core skill or value listed 
above, or must be relevant to some topical area dealt with in law school. 
The philosophy behind the minor is to allow students flexibility in choice, 
while providing them with relevant and beneficial curriculum choices. An 
approved law-related internship is highly recommended, and can also be 
used to fulfill one of the two additional course requirements. POLI 100 
American Government is strongly recommended. 

No more than two courses in the minor can be used to count for the Major 
and/or core. Students interested in the minor should contact Tina Fryling in 
the Criminal Justice department. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Psychology 138 Psychology 

Psychology 

DEPARTMENT CHAIR 

Melissa Heerboth, Ph.D. 

FACULTY 

Professor: 

Robert Hoff, M.A. 
Marilyn Livosky, Ph.D. 


Associate Professor: 

Gerard Barron, Psy.D. 

Melissa Heerboth, Ph.D. 

Gerard Tobin, Ph.D. 

Assistant Professor: 

Matthew Weaver, Ph.D. 

Adjunct Faculty: 

Bradley McGarry, M.A. 
Judith Smith, Ph.D. 


INTRODUCTION 

Psychology is the scientific study of thoughts, feelings and behavior. 
Research psychologists strive to gain an understanding of the processes 
underlying human behavior by examining influences ranging from the 
neurobiological to the sociocultural. It is an ever-changing discipline that 
has broad applicability across many diverse contexts. A detective 
interviewing a child who witnessed a crime, an engineer designing a cockpit 
for ease of use, a doctor who designs a treatment plan for a patient, or a 
marketing executive designing a new ad campaign would all benefit from 
using psychology. Many of our students enter graduate or professional 
programs in psychology or in related areas such as law, medicine, social 
work, government, sports or business. Other students enter the job market 
in a variety of applied settings immediately after graduation, most 
commonly in social services or the helping professions. 

Psychology majors can expect rigorous training in scientific literacy, critical 
thinking, ethics, social responsibility, cultural competency and 
communication skills. The American Psychological Association counts career 
development as one of its five major goals of undergraduate education. This 
means that students will be taught how to apply psychological findings to 
their own career skills, including how to exhibit self-efficacy and self-
regulation, refine project-management skills, enhancing teamwork 
capacity, and developing meaningful professional direction for life after 
graduation. 

To accomplish these goals with offering the maximum amount of flexibility 
for students to pursue their own chosen areas, the Psychology major at 
Mercyhurst offers three distinct tracks: a general track which affords 

students flexibility to double major, an applied track with an emphasis on 
preparing students for jobs or graduate study in the helping professions, and 
a research track with an emphasis on scientific research and building an 
impressive application to graduate school. In addition to these tracks, 
concentrations such as Neuroscience and Crime and Justice are offered. 
Students are encouraged to consult with their advisors to help determine 
the track that is the best fit. 

MISSION STATEMENT 

The Department of Psychology at Mercyhurst University fully adopts both 
the core values at Mercyhurst University and the American Psychological 
Association’s goals for undergraduate education and seeks to develop 
students that are 

-Socially merciful, in that they are able to build and enhance 
interpersonal relationships and adopt values that build 
community at local, national and global levels 

-Globally responsible through their application of ethical 
standards in their evaluation of psychological science and 
practice 

-Compassionately hospitable through their ability to interact 
effectively and sensitively with people of diverse abilities, 
backgrounds and cultural perspectives 

-Intellectually creative with their ability to interpret, design and 
conduct basic psychological research and their firm foundation 
in psychology’s content areas 

-Reflectively aware with their ability to apply psychological 
content and skills to explain behavior and mental processes, 
including accurate, critical self-assessment of performance and 
the ability to develop and execute strategies for exceeding 
performance criteria 

PROGRAM STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 

In accordance with the American Psychological Association’s 2.0 Guidelines 
for Undergraduate Education in Psychology, Mercyhurst Psychology 
graduates will be expected to demonstrate: 

-A firm knowledge base in psychology -Scientific and critical thinking -Ethical and social responsibility -Communication skills -Professional development skills -Knowledge about the history and progression of the field of 

psychology 

PSYCHOLOGY MAJOR DEGREE REQUIREMENTS (BACHELOR OF ARTS) 39 
credits 

All majors in psychology must take the following courses and earn a grade 

of C or higher: 
PSYC 101 Introduction to Psychology 3 credits 
PSYC 291/293 Research Design and Statistical Analysis I 4 credits 
with lab 
PSYC 292/295 Research Design and Statistical Analysis II 4 credits 
with lab 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Psychology 139 Psychology 

PSYC 203 Majoring in Psychology 1 credit 
PSYC 301 History of Psychology (take in senior year) 3 credits 
Additionally, students must take one course from each cluster area: 

Cluster 1: Social/Personality 

PSYC 201 Personality Psychology 3 credits 
PSYC 231 Social Psychology 3 credits 
PSYC 233 Cross Cultural Psychology 3 credits 
PSYC 265 Psychology of Gender 3 credits 

Cluster 2: Developmental/Cognitive 

PSYC 237 Memory and Cognition 3 credits 
PSYC 241 Developmental Psychology: Childhood 3 credits 
PSYC 242 Developmental Psychology: Adolescence 3 credits 

Cluster 3: Applied/Clinical 

PSYC 211 Abnormal Psychology 3 credits 
PSYC 221 Clinical Psychology 3 credits 
PSYC 222 Psychological Assessment 3 credits 
PSYC 294 Industrial/Organizational Psychology 3 credits 

Cluster 4: Biological/Health 

PSYC 225 Health Psychology 3 credits 
PSYC 252 Biopsychology 3 credits 
PSYC 253 Drugs and Human Behavior 3 credits 

GENERAL PSYCHOLOGY 

Students opting for the General Track in the Psychology major must have a 
major GPA of 2.25 or higher. Students in this track must take: 
One advanced-level (300 -400) Psychology course 3 credits 

Three additional Psychology electives 9 credits 

APPLIED PSYCHOLOGY CONCENTRATION 

Students opting for the Applied Track in the Psychology major must have a 
major GPA of 2.5 or higher. Students in this track must take: 
One advanced-level (300 – 400) Psychology course 3 credits 

PSYC 223: Counseling Theory and Skills 3 credits 
One additional Psychology elective 3 credits 
PSYC 475 Psychology Internship 3 credits 

RESEARCH CONCENTRATION 

Students opting for the Research Track in the Psychology major must have a 
major GPA of 2.5 or higher. Students in this track must take: 
Two advanced-level (300 – 400) Psychology courses 3 credits 

One additional Psychology elective 3 credits 
PSYC 490: Senior Research Practicum 3 credits 

NEUROSCIENCE CONCENTRATION 

The Neuroscience concentration offers a program of study that relates 
behavior to bodily processes, especially the workings of the brain. The main 
goal of this area of study is to understand behavior and experience in terms 
of their biological substrates. 

Required: 

PSYC 101 Introduction to Psychology 3 credits 

PSYC 252 Biopsychology 3 credits 

PSYC Research Design and Statistical Analysis 4 credits 

291/293 I and lab 
BIO 142/143 Cellular and Molecular Biology and lab 4 credits 
BIO 146/147 Ecology and Evolutionary Biology and 4 credits 

lab 
BIO 450 Neurobiology 3 credits 
In addition, students must take any three from the following: 
PSYC 211 Abnormal Psychology 3 credits 
PSYC Learning and Motivation and lab 4 credits 
236/238 
PSYC 237 Memory and Cognition 3 credits 
PSYC 253 Drugs and Human Behavior 3 credits 
PSYC 352 Seminar in Biological Psychology: Topics 3 credits 

in Neuroscience 
BIO 310/311 Genetics and lab 4 credits 
BIO 320/321 Comparative Vertebrate Anatomy and 4 credits 

lab 
BIO 330/331 Immunology and lab 4 credits 
BIO 370/371 Cellular Biochemistry and lab 4 credits 

PSYCHOLOGY MINOR 19 credits 

A minor in Psychology would be a useful complement to any major area of 
study. Six courses are required for the Psychology minor, including: 
PSYC 101 Introduction to Psychology 3 credits 
PSYC 291/293 Research Design and Statistical Analysis 4 credits 

and lab 
Four (4) electives in Psychology 12 credits 

INTERDISCIPLINARY MINORS 
PSYCHOLOGY OF CRIME AND JUSTICE MINOR 

The Departments of Psychology and Criminal Justice have developed a 
sequence of study to provide students with an interdisciplinary focus in the 
psychology of crime and justice. The minor is designed to complement 
undergraduate degrees in psychology, criminal justice and other social and 
behavioral sciences. 

In addition to the course requirements for a Psychology degree, Psychology 
majors who seek to qualify for a minor in the Psychology of Crime and 
Justice must complete these additional courses and maintain a 2.5 GPA: 

PSYC 211 Abnormal Psychology 3 credits 
PSYC 253 Drugs and Human Behavior 3 credits 
CRJS 101 Justice in America 3 credits 
CRJS 104 Introduction to Corrections 3 credits 
CRJS/SOC 230 Criminology 3 credits 
CRJS 310 Constitutional Law in Criminal 3 credits 

Procedure I 
CRJS/PSYC 350 Antecedents of Aggression 3 credits 
CRJS 245/ Psychology and the Law 3 credits 
PSYC 240 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Public Health 140 Public Health 

Public Health 

DEPARTMENT CHAIR 

Thomas Cook, Ph.D. 

FACULTY 

Assistant Professors: 

Thomas Cook, Ph.D. 

Instructor 

Sarah McCool, Ph.D. 

Jointly Appointed Faculty: 

Professors: 

Robert Hoff, M.A. 
(Psychology) 
David C. Hyland, Ph.D. 
(Biology) 


Assistant Professor: 

Suzanne Gushie, M.A., A.T.C. 
(Sports Medicine) 

INTRODUCTION 

The Public Health Department offers a Bachelor of Arts, Bachelor of Science 
and a minor in public health. The Public Health program at Mercyhurst was 
developed to meet the growing demand for public health studies among 
college students nationwide and in response to the Institute of Medicine's 
recommendation to the U.S. Department of Education that all college 
campuses offer public health coursework to undergraduate students. 

In 2009, the Los Angeles Times reported that the U.S. is facing a "public 
health workforce shortage" and noted that by 2020 America will be short 
more than 250,000 public health workers. The Public Health program at 
Mercyhurst will train students who are able to pursue and take leadership 
roles. Students majoring in public health can pursue a wide range of public 
health careers including: public health practice, health education, infection 
control, environmental health, epidemiology, biostatistics, health services 
research or administration, health policy, and international health. 

Public health also provides a strong platform for students interested in a 
wide variety of careers in related fields including medicine, health care, 
biotechnology and the life sciences. There are also a wide variety of 
graduate school options for students pursuing a public health major. There 
are currently more than 50 graduate schools of public health in the U.S. in 
some of the nation's best universities offering both master’s and doctoral 
degrees. 

MISSION STATEMENT 

Consistent with the mission of Mercyhurst University, the Public Health 
Department at Mercyhurst seeks to educate students to be globally 
responsible citizens who take intelligent actions to improve the lives and 
conditions of people around the world. The Department strives to: 
Instill a passion for public health knowledge and action in undergraduate 
students 

Train the next generation of public health workers who “think globally, act 
locally” 

Become a community resource and repository for public health knowledge 

Serve as an exemplar for undergraduate public health studies for colleges 
and universities around the country 

Develop public health curricula, case studies and learning tools that can be 
adopted by other public health programs 

Design and implement public health continuing education training 
opportunities for existing members of the public health workforce 

Conduct cutting edge public health research designed to improve the health 
and wellbeing of populations of people 

Disseminate public health knowledge through peer-reviewed publications, 
public reports and national, regional and local presentations 

Provide high school and college students with information about public 
health as a career option 

Increase awareness about the health and conditions of populations around 
the world 

PROGRAM STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 

The faculty members of the Public Health Department have identified five 
major Student Learning Outcomes (SLOs) for majors in the Public Health 
Program. These SLOs are based on the 14 Council for Education in Public 
Health (CEPH) specific learning outcomes, which have been combined into 5 
broader learning outcomes. The learning outcomes are as follows: 

Demonstrate an understanding of the history and philosophy of public 
health, the health care system and the relevant dimensions of health policy, 
law, ethics and economics related to public health. 

Identify the role and importance of using data in public health for 
identifying and addressing population health challenges 

Demonstrate an understanding of the science of human health and disease 
and the principles of health promotion and health protection. 

Describe the role socioeconomic, behavioral, biological and environmental 
factors on human health and their contribution to health disparities. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Public Health 141 Public Health 

Use mass media, technical writing and technology to effectively 
communicate health-related information and to disseminate public health 
messages to a wide range of audiences. 

UNIQUE FOCUS 

The public health program has a unique focus that provides students with 

skills that are: 

Cutting edge 

Distinct 

Marketable 

In addition to core public health methods they will learn new and evolving 
methods that are likely to shape the field over the next decade including 
crowd sourcing, social network analysis, and agent based modeling. 
Students will graduate with a distinct set of skills that are marketable to 
employers or that will make them strong candidates for further studies. 

These skills include strong data analysis, statistical programming, and 
database development skills. In addition, from the outset, they will be 
taught "soft skills" related to professionalism, teamwork and advancement 
that will put them on a path to exceed in their careers. 

UNIQUE EXPERIENTIAL APPROACH 

The public health program has a unique approach that defines the program 
and sets it apart from most other undergraduate programs in public health. 
Three defining principles provide maximum benefit for career development: 

Competency focused 

Team based 

Applied 

Knowledge acquisition is only one aspect of learning. The public health 
program focuses on teaching students skills that are critical for a successful 
career in public health. This approach focuses not only on what students 
know when they graduate but also on what they can do and is consistent 
with professional expectations for public health graduates entering the 
work force or graduate studies. The curriculum is team based and harnesses 
that power to improve student outcomes and learning through case studies 
projects, exercises and simulations. 

PUBLIC HEALTH DEGREE REQUIREMENTS (B.A.) 

Bachelor of Arts in Public Health (BAPH) majors must maintain a 2.5 GPA in 
the major concentration to be recommended for graduation. There are 10 
required core courses in the public health curriculum: 

PUBH 101 Foundations of Public Health 3 credits 
PUBH 102 Professionalism in Public Health 3 credits 
PUBH 105 Health Care Policy & Law 3 credits 
PUBH 109 Health Education 3 credits 
PUBH 201 Environmental Health 3 credits 
PUBH 211 Global Health 3 credits 
STAT 137 Biostatistics 3 credits 
PUBH 260 Principles of Epidemiology I 3 credits 
PUBH 285 Health Evaluation, Research, Methods & 3 credits 
Analysis 
PUBH 290 Social Determinants of Health 3 credits 

Courses that meet the university’s core requirements as well as the major 
core are: PUBH 101 Foundations of Public Health and PUBH 240 Biostatistics. 

Practicum Requirement: All students in the BAPH track must also 
complete a field experience, internship or research practicum prior to 

graduation. 
PUBH 475 Public Health Field Experience 
OR 
PUBH 476 Public Health Internship 
OR 
PUBH 490 Public Health Senior Research Practicu*Pre-requisites: PUBH 240, 260 & 285 
3 credits 
3 credits 
m* 3 credits 
Elective Course Requirements 

BAPH majors are also required to take at least seven (7) additional relevant 
multidisciplinary courses (21 credits) of which at least two (2) must be 
Public Health (PUBH) electives (6 credits). Students work with their public 
health faculty advisors to choose elective classes. 
Public health faculty must approve all multidisciplinary electives other than 
PUBH courses for them to count as part of the public health degree. 
Examples of acceptable multidisciplinary courses offered outside the Public 
Health Department include: 
HIS 175 World Geography 3 credits 
ANTH 112 World Cultures 3 credits 
ANTH 227 Ethnographic Field Methods 3 credits 
COMM 185 Communication in Society 3 credits 
COMM 315 Communication Techniques 3 credits 
COMM 329 Communication and Social Responsibility 3 credits 
COMM 369 Global Communication 3 credits 
CRJS/SOC 203 Deviant Behavior 3 credits 
CRJS/SOC 220 Drugs, Crime & Criminal Justice 3 credits 
CRJS/SOCW Crisis Intervention 3 credits 
313 
HIST 229 Environmental History of U.S. 3 credits 
POLI 395 Environmental Politics 3 credits 
POLI 202 Contemporary Environmental Issues 3 credits 
POLI 280 Global Environmental Politics 3 credits 
POLI 320 Environmental Philosophy 3 credits 
PSYC 101 Introduction to Psychology 3 credits 
PSYC 222 Psychological Assessment 3 credits 
PSYC 225 Health Psychology 3 credits 
PSYC 231 Social Psychology 3 credits 
PSYC 252 Biopsychology 3 credits 
PSYC 253 Drugs and Human Behavior 3 credits 
PSYC 281 Behavior Modification 3 credits 
PSYC 282 Basic Principles of Applied Behavior 3 credits 

Analysis 
PSYC 291 Research Methods I 3 credits 
PSYC 292 Research Methods II 3 credits 
RIAP 250 Professional Communications 1 credit 
RIAP 272 Terrorism 3 credits 
SOC 100 Introduction to Sociology 3 credits 
SOC 101 Contemporary Social Problems 3 credits 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Public Health 142 Public Health 

SOC 204 Diversity in Society 3 credits 
SOC 300 Sociological Research Methods 3 credits 
SOC 342 Human Needs and Global Problem 3 credits 
SOC/POLI 362 Global Issues 3 credits 
SOCW 107 Introduction to Social Work 3 credits 
SOCW 220 Human Behavior and the Social 3 credits 
Environment I 
SOCW 221 Human Behavior and the Social 3 credits 
Environment II 
SOCW 304 Social Welfare Analysis 3 credits 
PUBLIC HEALTH DEGREE REQUIREMENTS (B.S.) 

Bachelor of Science in Public Health (BSPH) majors must maintain a 2.5 GPA 
in the major concentration to be recommended for graduation. There are 10 
required core courses in the public health curriculum: 
PUBH 101 Foundations of Public Health 3 credits 
PUBH 102 Professionalism in Public Health 3 credits 
PUBH 105 Health Care Policy & Law 3 credits 
PUBH 109 Health Education 3 credits 
PUBH 201 Environmental Health 3 credits 
PUBH 211 Global Health 3 credits 
STAT 137 Biostatistics 3 credits 
PUBH 260 Principles of Epidemiology I 3 credits 
PUBH 290 Social Determinants of Health 3 credits 
PUBH 261 Principles of Epidemiology II 3 credits 

Practicum Requirements: All students in the BSPH track must also 
complete a field experience, internship or research practicum before 
graduation. 
PUBH 475 Public Health Field Experience 3 credits 
Or 
PUBH 476 Public Health Internship 3 credits 
Or 
PUBH 490 Public Health Senior Research Practicum* 3 credits 
*Pre-requisites: PUBH 240, 260 & 261 

Courses that meet the university core requirements as well as the major core 
is STAT 137 Biostatistics. 

Elective Course Requirements 

Students in the BSPH program are also required to take five 
multidisciplinary electives in math and science and two additional Public 
Health electives. Students work with their public health faculty advisors to 
choose these classes. Public Health faculty must approve all math and 
science electives for them to count as part of the public health degree. 

Students who are pre-health are required to work with both their pre-health 
advisor and Public Health advisor to choose appropriate courses to ensure 
that they meet the requirements of the specific graduate or professional 
program that they are interested in pursuing after graduation. 

These students may be required to take greater than 5 science and math 
courses to meet these requirements. Examples of acceptable 
multidisciplinary courses include: 

BIO 120 Human Biology 3 credits 
BIO 121 Human Biology Lab 1 credit 
BIO 125 Medical Terminology 1 credit 
BIO 142 Cellular and Molecular Biology 3 credits 
BIO 143 Cell and Molecular Biology Lab 1 credit 
BIO 180 Microorganisms 3 credits 
BIO 181 Microorganisms Lab 1 credit 
BIO 200 Microbiology 3 credits 
BIO 201 Microbiology Lab 1 credit 
BIO 296 Biology of Development and Aging 3 credits 
BIO 330 Immunology 3 credits 
BIO 331 Immunology Lab 1 credit 
CHEM 121 General Chemistry I 3 credits 
CHEM 122 General Chemistry I Lab 1 credit 
CHEM 131 General Chemistry II 3 credits 
CHEM 132 General Chemistry II Lab 1 credit 
CHEM 240 Organic Chemistry I 3 credits 
CHEM 241 Organic Chemistry I Lab 1 credit 
CHEM 250 Writing and Communication for Scientists 3 credits 
SCI 150 Understanding Science 3 credits 
STAT 109 Statistics 3 credits 
STAT 209 Statistics II 3 credits 
MATH 291 Statistical Analysis 3 credits 
MIS 110 Advanced Computer Applications 3 credits 
PHYS 100 Conceptual Physics 3 credits 
PHYS 101 Principles of Physics I 3 credits 
PHYS 103 Principles of Physics I Lab 1 credit 
PHYS 102 Principles of Physics II 3 credits 
PHYS 106 Principles of Physics II Lab 1 credit 
SCI 170 Energy Science 3 credits 
SCI 171 Energy Science Lab 1 credit 
SCI 235 Computational Science 3 credits 
PUBLIC HEALTH MINOR 

A minor in Public Health is useful to any student considering a career in 
medicine, health care or the health sciences. Seven courses are required for 
the Public Health minor. 
PUBH 101 Foundations of Public Health 3 credits 
PUBH 201 Environmental Health 3 credits 
PUBH 211 Global Health 3 credits 
STAT 137 Biostatistics 3 credits 
PUBH 260 Principles of Epidemiology I 3 credits 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Religious Studies 
143 Religious Studies 

Religious Studies 

DEPARTMENT CHAIR 

Robert von Thaden Jr., Ph.D. 

FACULTY 

Professors: 

Mary Hembrow Snyder, Ph.D. 
Thomas Forsthoefel, Ph.D. 
Daniel McFee, Ph.D. 


Associate Professors: 

Robert von Thaden Jr., Ph.D. 
Verna Ehret, Ph.D. 
Richard McCarty, Ph.D. 


PROGRAM MISSION STATEMENT 

The academic study of religion is a central component to the humanities 
curriculum of Mercyhurst University. Understanding the full dimension of 
religious experience and inquiry is integral to the human quest for meaning 
and value. In keeping with this principle, the Religious Studies Department 
has constructed a series of courses aimed at developing critical thinking, 
creativity, compassion, and a sensitivity to justice in its students. 
Methodological approaches include comparative, textual-historical, 
constructive and theological. 

Rooted in its Catholic origins and committed to the classical critical inquiry 
of the Catholic intellectual tradition, a spirit of ecumenical and interfaith 
openness nevertheless is a defining characteristic of the Religious Studies 
Department. In this spirit, students majoring in Religious Studies are 
minimally required to take two courses from each of three areas to ensure a 
well-rounded education in various aspects of the academic study of religion. 
Such a structure allows students to explore their own interests— 
academically, professionally, and personally. Some students might wish to 
focus their major in the cross-cultural study of religion, for example. At the 
same time, the department also supports students wishing to pursue deeper 
studies in the Catholic tradition by making specific courses available for the 
Catholic Studies minor. 

STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 

Upon completing the Bachelor of Arts in Religious Studies, graduates will be 
able to: 

1. 
Identify and explain multiplicity in religion through experiences, 
contexts and voices of religions. 
2. 
Compare and contrast religious traditions. 
3. 
Analyze ideological paradigms. 
4. 
Analyze and synthesize information from primary and secondary 
sources. 
5. 
Apply different methodological approaches to the academic 
study of religion. 
RELIGIOUS STUDIES MAJOR AND MINOR 

The department offers a Bachelor of Arts in Religious Studies, consisting of 
ten courses, and a Religious Studies minor, consisting of six. A 2.5 GPA is 
required of all seeking a major or minor from this department. The study of 
a foreign language is highly encouraged for all students in this major. 

The Religious Studies program is organized into three principal areas: 

1. 
Tradition, Texts & History 
2. 
Pluralism, Comparison & Society 
3. 
Theology, Philosophy,& Ethics 
A religious studies major requires: 

• 
A minimum of 10 courses in RLST (One CST from the RLST 
curriculum list can count for an RLST) 
• 
Two courses in each of the categories below 
• 
RLST 480: Senior Seminar (Offered every other fall semester. 
Students who cannot take it in the year required will take the 
thesis credit instead.) 
• 
Three RLST electives 
• 
Two courses at the 300 level or above (in addition to the Senior 
Seminar) 
A religious studies minor requires: 

• 
A minimum of six courses in RLST (One CST from the RLST 
curriculum list can count for an RLST.) 
• 
One course in each of the categories below 
• 
Three RLST electives 
• 
RLST 480: Senior Seminar is recommended but not required 
• 
One course at the 300 level or above (can include the Senior 
Seminar) 
Students also minoring in Catholic Studies may double count one course 
between their RLST and CST programs. 

TRADITIONS, TEXTS & HISTORY 

RLST 110 Sacred Texts 3 credits 
RLST 205 Western Christian Heritage 3 credits 
RLST 206 Hinduism 3 credits 
RLST 207 Buddhism 3 credits 
RLST 208 Islam 3 credits 
RLST 210 New Testament & Christian Origins 3 credits 
RLST 270 Women & Scripture 3 credits 
RLST 315 Wisdom Literature 3 credits 
RLST 390 Apocalypse to Zombie 3 credits 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Religious Studies 144 Religious Studies 

PLURALISM, COMPARISON & SOCIETY SECOND YEAR EVALUATION 
RLST 100 What is Religion? 3 credits At the end of two years, each major student’s progress is reviewed to 
RLST 115 World Religions 3 credits determine continuation in the program. Special attention is paid to an 
RLST 235 Sacred & Cinema 3 credits ongoing commitment to intellectual growth and to the maintenance of the 
RLST 255 Religious Perspectives on Human 3 credits 2.5 GPA minimum requirement. A formal request for delay of this review 
Relationships into the third year requires special permission from the department director. 
RLST 265 American Religion 3 credits 
RLST 266 Globalized Religion 3 credits WRITING TO LEARN 
RLST 280 Prophetic Traditions 3 credits Courses in Religious Studies feature writing and the development of writing 
RLST 305 Death & Dying 3 credits skills as a constitutive part of the program. All courses require essays, 
RLST 385 Poetry of the Sacred 3 credits papers, critiques and provide opportunities for revisions and for consultation 
with faculty for improving critical writing skills. 
THEOLOGY, PHILOSOPHY & ETHICS 
RLST 200 Contemporary Moral Issues 3 credits 
RLST 230 Jesus the Christ 3 credits 
RLST 250 Eastern Philosophy 3 credits 
RLST 260 Catholic Symbols & Sacraments 3 credits 
RLST 275 Liberation, Religion, & Society 3 credits 
RLST 295 Religion, Science, & Magic 3 credits 
RLST 310 Evolving Religion 3 credits 
RLST 345 Philosophy of Religion 3 credits 
RLST 375 Religion & the Environment 3 credits 
RLST 405 Social Ethics 3 credits 
RLST 420 Mysticism 3 credits 
RLST 440 Peace & Justice 3 credits 
CST 100 Exploring Catholicism 3 credits 
CST 250 Theology of the Church 3 credits 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


APPLIED SOCIOLOGY 145 APPLIED SOCIOLOGY 


APPLIED SOCIOLOGY 
SOCIAL WORK 


DEPARTMENT CHAIR 

Laura Lewis, Ph.D., A.C.S.W., LSW 

FACULTY 

Professor: 

Laura Lewis, Ph.D., A.C.S.W., LSW 

Assistant Professor: 

Bora Pajo, Ph.D. 

Part-time Faculty: 

Mandy Fauble, Ph.D., LCSW 

Professor Emeritus: 

Peggy Black, Ph.D., LCSW 

Adjunct: 

Molly Monahan Lang, Ph.D. 

INTRODUCTION 

The program in Applied Sociology maintains an educational philosophy 
characterized by the sharing of learning between professor and student. 
Students with applied sociological research and theoretical skills will find 
themselves prepared for the emergent occupations in our rapidly changing 
society. The department offers senior students options for a thesis or 
internship opportunities both locally or outside of the Erie community. A 
Criminology concentration is offered to applied sociology majors interested 
in the study of crime and criminal behavior. The courses emphasize skills in 
research, analysis, and evaluation. Minors are offered in Gerontology, Social 
Welfare and Gender Studies. The Gender Studies minor is interdisciplinary 
and listed separately in the catalog. 

MISSION STATEMENT 

The Applied Sociology program provides students with the necessary skills 
to understand human behaviors and the dynamics of our global society. Our 
curriculum is based on liberal arts and strives to enhance students’ critical 
thinking skills through a strong foundation of theory and research. A degree 
in applied sociology affords a strong foundation for graduate education, and 
opens the doors to a wide range of career paths such as data analytics, law, 
social services, public policy, business and communication. 

PROGRAM STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 

Demonstrate an understanding of the theoretical background of the field of 
applied sociology. 

Understand the importance of different types of scientific research, be able 
to formulate research questions, and demonstrate an understanding of data 
collection and data analysis. 

Demonstrate knowledge of social problems and their impact on human 
behavior and wellbeing. 

Demonstrate skills in critically thinking and ethical decision making. 

APPLIED SOCIOLOGY MAJOR – BACHELOR OF ARTS – 
CORE REQUIREMENTS 

The Sociology major must achieve at least a 2.5 GPA in major courses. 

SOC 100 Introduction to Sociology 3 credits 
SOC 101 Contemporary Social Problems 3 credits 
SOC 300 Sociological Research Methods 3 credits 
SOC 301 Contemporary Sociological Theory 3 credits 
STAT 130 Introduction to Social Statistics 3 credits 
SOC 204 Diversity in Society 3 credits 
SOC 342 Human Needs and Global Problems 3 credits 
SOC 490 Senior Project 

OR 

SOC 475/476 Applied Sociology Internship 3/6 credits 
Five (5) Applied Sociology electives 15 credits 

CRIMINOLOGY CONCENTRATION REQUIREMENTS 

SOC 100 Introduction to Sociology 3 credits 
SOC 101 Contemporary Social Problems 3 credits 
SOC 300 Sociological Research Methods 3 credits 
SOC 301 Contemporary Sociological Theory 3 credits 
STAT 130 Introduction to Social Statistics 3 credits 
SOC 204 Diversity in Society 3 credits 
SOC 342 Human Needs and Global Problems 3 credits 
SOC 490 Senior Project 

OR 

SOC 475/476 Applied Sociology Internship 3/6 credits 
SOC/CRJS230/ Criminology 3 credits 
SOC/CRJS 337/ Sociology of Law 3 credits 
SOC/CRJS 220 Drugs, Crime and Criminal Justice 3 credits 
CRJS 240 Victimology 3 credits 
SOC/CRJS/PSYC Antecedents of Aggression 3 credits 
350 
Two (2) Criminology Electives 6 credits 

SOCIOLOGY MINOR 

The Sociology minor must achieve at least a 2.5 GPA in minor courses. 
SOC 100 Introduction to Sociology 3 credits 
OR 
SOC 101 Contemporary Social Problems 3 credits 
SOC 204 Diversity in Society 3 credits 
SOC 342 Human Needs and Global Problems 3 credits 
SOC 301 Contemporary Sociological Theory 3 credits 
Three (3) Applied Sociology Electives 9 credits 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


APPLIED SOCIOLOGY 146 APPLIED SOCIOLOGY 


GERONTOLOGY MINOR 

The Gerontology minor must achieve at least a 2.5 GPA in minor courses. 

SOC 107 Introduction to Gerontology 3 credits 
SOC 214 Grief and Loss 3 credits 
SOC 312 Services and Resources for the Aged 3 credits 
SOC 475/476 Applied Sociology Internship at an 3/6 credits 
approved site serving older adults 

OR 

SOCW Social Work Internship at an 3/6/9 credits 
485/486/487 approved site serving older adults 
Three (3) Electives (Must support content on aging and 9 credits 
be approved by advisor.) 

GENDER STUDIES MINOR 

Housed in the Departments of Anthropology, Applied Sociology, and 
Psychology, the Gender Studies minor provides students with the 
opportunity to learn about the subject of gender through a multidisciplinary 
encounter. This minor facilitates formal discourse involving issues such as 
the negotiation of power, identities and social reproduction. It further 
recognizes the university’s special history of empowering women, offering 
engendered programs of learning, and promoting a well-balanced 
environment of study through academics and service learning. The study of 
gender and related issues promotes cultural competency in a wide variety of 
workplace, academic, and domestic settings. Through an appreciation of 
gender differences, roles, and historic interactions in a variety of contexts, 
students enhance their ability to function in the workplace and at home 
through the fostering of better interpersonal relationships and 
communication. 
Interested students should contact Dr. Ruth Jolie for further information. 

The Gender Studies minor has the following required courses: 

ANTH 125 Introduction to Gender Studies 3 credits 
PSYCH 265 Psychology of Gender 3 credits 
*Students must also complete 5 approved elective courses 15 credits 
from across the Mercyhurst University Curriculum, no 
more than 2 from one department. 

ELECTIVE COURSES 

ANTH 227 Ethnographic Field Methods *with approval 3 credits 

by instructor 
ANTH 346 Anthropology of Gender 3 credits 
ANTH 349 Anthropology of the Family 3 credits 
CRJS 335 Seminar: Women in Crime 3 credits 
ENGL 374 Women and Literature 3 credits 
FREN 135 Topics in French Literature: Gender 3 credits 
FREN 305 Seminar: Gender 3 credits 
HIST 280 Gendering World History I 3 credits 
HIST 281 Gendering World History II 3 credits 
HIST/CRJS Seminar: Crime, Gender and Violence in the 3 credits 
382 Modern World 
RLST 176 Feminist Theologies 3 credits 
RLST 255 Religious Perspectives on Human 3 credits 

Relationships 
RLST 270 Women in Scripture 3 credits 

SOC 204 Diversity in Society 3 credits 
SPAN 305 Seminar: Gender in Hispanic Civilization 3 credits 

SOCIAL WORK PROGRAM 

The Mercyhurst Social Work Program is accredited at the baccalaureate level 
by the Council on Social Work Education. 

The primary objective of the Social Work program is to prepare the student 
for beginning generalist professional social work practice. The sequence of 
courses provides a core of knowledge, skills and social work values as well as 
distinctive professional competencies required for social work practice. 
Emphasis is placed on furthering knowledge and skills to aid people of 
diverse backgrounds to achieve meaningful, productive lives building on 
their strengths by utilizing an empowerment process. 

Social Work requires both academic and interpersonal relationship skills. 
Respect for human dignity, knowledge of self and integrity, together with a 
commitment to social work values and ethics, and social and economic 
justice are necessary personal and professional attributes. 

Students must apply for admission to the Department during the third term 
of their sophomore year, or after completion of 60 credits. A formal 
application, references, grade point average, and an interview form the 
basis for selection of majors. Application packets are available from the 
program director. 

MISSION STATEMENT – SOCIAL WORK 

The Social Work Program is dedicated to preparing competent generalist 
social work practitioners who are well grounded in the values and ethics of 
the social work profession. The program is driven by the university mission 
that calls for students to be “socially merciful, globally responsible, 
compassionately hospitable, intellectually creative, reflectively aware 
ambassadors of service.” Coupled with critical thinking, values and ethics, 
the program seeks to provide the knowledge base and competencies 
required for students to practice in a diverse society. The program strives to 
lay a foundation that enables students to assist individuals, families, groups 
and communities in their pursuit of wellbeing. The program is committed 
to teaching students about the role we must play in working toward 
creating a more just society that embraces human diversity and provides for 
the basic needs of all. 

PROGRAM STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 

The social work program has identified 9 core competencies and student 
learning outcomes (SLO) that are guided by the Council on Social Work 
Education. These include: 

Identify as a professional social worker and conduct oneself accordingly. 

Apply social work ethical principles to guide professional practice. 

Apply critical thinking to inform and communicate professional judgments. 

Engage diversity and difference in practice. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


APPLIED SOCIOLOGY 147 APPLIED SOCIOLOGY 


Advance human rights and social and economic justice. SOCIAL WORK MAJOR -BACHELOR OF ARTS REQUIREMENTS 


Engage in research-informed and practice-informed research. 

Apply knowledge of human behavior and the social environment. 

Engage in policy practice to advance social and economic wellbeing and to 
deliver effective social work. 

Respond to contexts that shape practice. 

Engage, assess, intervene and evaluate with individuals, families, groups, 
organizations and communities. 

SOPHOMORE REVIEW 

The credentials of Social Work majors are reviewed by the Social Work 
program faculty at the end of the sophomore year and at the completion of 
the Social Work Practice I course, prior to submission of the request for 
placement form. Students whose academic performance is satisfactory, but 
who do not have the personal or professional aptitude will be helped to 
select another major. Students with a major GPA lower than 2.5 may be 
asked to discontinue the program. A 2.5 GPA is necessary for placement in 
fieldwork. Students must receive a C or better in all social work (SOCW) 
courses and are allowed to repeat a course only one time. 

SENIOR COMPETENCY PAPER 

Students are required to complete a competency paper during their field 
placements. The specifics are delineated in the Social Work Field Work 
Manual. 

SOCW 107 Introduction to Social Work 3 credits 
SOC 100 Introduction to Sociology 3 credits 
SOC 101 Contemporary Social Problems 3 credits 
SOC 204 Diversity in Society 3 credits 
POLI 100 American Government 3 credits 
PSYC 101 Introduction to Psychology 3 credits 
SOCW 220 Human Behavior and the Social 3 credits 
Environment I 
SOCW 221 Human Behavior and the Social 3 credits 
Environment II 
SOCW 304 Social Welfare Analysis 3 credits 
SOC 300 Sociological Research Methods 3 credits 
SOCW 307 Social Work Practice I 3 credits 
SOCW 330 Social Work Practice II 3 credits 
STATS 130 Introduction to Social Statistics 3 credits 
SOCW 430 Social Work Practice III 3 credits 
SOCW 440 Social Welfare Policy and Procedures 3 credits 
SOCW 480 Social Work Seminar 3 credits 
SOCW Social Work Internship 3/6/9 credits 
485/486/487 
One (1) Major Elective 3 credits 

**It is recommended that Social Work majors take Human Biology 
for their science and American Government for their Contexts & 
Systems. 

SOCIAL WELFARE MINOR 

SOC 101 Contemporary Social Problems 3 credits 
SOC 204 Diversity in Society 3 credits 
SOCW 220 Human Behavior and the Social Environment 3 credits 

I 
SOCW 304 Social Welfare Analysis 3 credits 
Three (3) Social Work/Applied Sociology Electives 9 credits 

Social Welfare minors must achieve a minimum 2.5 GPA in minor courses. 
The Social Welfare minor is not accredited by the Council of Social Work 
Education. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Sports Medicine 148 Sports Medicine 

Sports Medicine 

DEPARTMENT CHAIRPERSON: 

Bradley R. Jacobson, M.A., ATC 
Assistant Professor 


FACULTY 

Associate Professor 

Robert D. Chetlin, Ph.D., CSCS, CEP 
Exercise Science Clinical Coordinator 


Assistant Professor 

Suzanne Gushie, M.A., ATC 
Athletic Training Education Clinical Coordinator 


Timothy Harvey, M.S., ATC 
Director of Exercise Science Program 


Bradley R. Jacobson, M.A., ATC 
Curriculum Coordinator and Clinical Coordinator of 
Pre-Physical Therapy, Pre-Medicine, Pre-Physician Assistant, Pre-
Occupational Therapy 


Instructor 

Scott Michael, Ph.D., ATC 
Athletic Training Clinical Education Program Director 


Medical Education Coordinator: 

Chris Rial, D.O. 

Adjunct Faculty: 

Chris Rial, D.O 
Elizabeth De Leon Soto, O.T. 
Julia Hawkins, O.T. 


INTRODUCTION 

The Department of Sports Medicine offers a Bachelor of Science degree in 
Sports Medicine to meet the increased need for people educated in this 
important field related to health care of the physically active individual and 
athlete. This degree encompasses the health related professions that 
prevent and manage injuries and illnesses related to active individuals and 
organized sports. The pre-health curricula in Sports Medicine prepare and 
qualify the student for entrance into post baccalaureate professional health 
degree programs. The Sports Medicine major at Mercyhurst is 
interdisciplinary in nature and is designed to prepare undergraduate college 
students for graduate studies and/or licensure or certification necessary to 
be hired in the areas of physical therapy, occupational therapy, physician 
assistant and medicine. Our guidelines have been provided by the American 
College of Sports Medicine, American Physical Therapy Association, the 

National Strength Coaches Association and the National Athletic Trainers 
Association and the Committee of Accreditation of Athletic Training 
Education, Accreditation Review Committee on Education for Physician 
Assistant, and the American Occupational Therapy Association. 

The Sports Medicine student must declare a professional concentration upon 
entrance into the department. Students have the option of declaring a dual 
concentration. Students are required to take courses from seven disciplines 
arranged in four optional concentrations with a core of courses common to 
each concentration. In all concentrations, there is a strong emphasis on 
Sports Medicine, the sciences, social sciences, observation of health care 
professionals and acquiring the specific hands on skill set related to specific 
health care professionals. Each concentration requires specific clinical 
experience related to that specific profession. Students enrolled in any of the 
pre-health concentrations within the Sports Medicine major are encouraged 
to pursue a double major with Exercise Science and or Athletic Training. 

Evidence-based medical principles are emphasized throughout the 
academic experience as well as completion of a student-focused 
baccalaureate research project. 

Students enrolled in the Sports Medicine major should be full-time students 
and must be enrolled in the designated sequence of courses for each 
declared concentration. 

MISSION STATEMENT 

The mission of the Sports Medicine Department is to provide the student 
with the necessary didactic competencies, psychomotor skills, clinical 
proficiencies, clinical experiences, research design, application, presentation 
and certification through a holistic approach. It is the goal of the 
department also to develop the student in the areas of citizenship, 
stewardship and self-awareness. The mission will be accomplished through 
student completion of curriculum student learning outcomes. 

PROGRAM STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 

Describe the duties, responsibilities and skill set of health professions that 
compose the Sports Medicine health field. 

Recognize and evaluate the anatomical and physiological processes of the 
physical active individual. 

Apply the specific hands on skill set that Sports Medicine health 
professionals utilize. 

Describe and apply the management, organizational and leadership skills of 
health professionals. 

Think critically and solve problems pertaining to medical and scientific 
concepts. 

Comprehend, synthesize and apply the proper research methodology 
process for health professions. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Sports Medicine 149 Sports Medicine 

ADMISSIONS REQUIREMENTS 

Freshmen students should have a minimum GPA of 3.0 in high school plus a 

3.0 in each of the following six subjects: Algebra, Geometry, Trigonometry, 
Biology, Chemistry and Physics, or General Science. At least 500 Math and 
500 Writing or Reading scores should be achieved for a total of 1000 on the 
SATs. Prior to entering their freshman year, it is required that Sports 
Medicine majors complete the American Red Cross Professional Rescuer/CPR 
certification, proof of which is a signed certification card. 
Transfer students, either from another department at Mercyhurst or from 
another college/university, should have a minimum GPA of 3.0 overall and a 

3.0 in an introductory biology course, an introductory psychology course, 
and a human development course, (if previously taken.) A total SAT score of 
950 is necessary. American Red Cross Professional Rescuer/CPR certification 
is required. 
FINAL ACCEPTANCE REQUIREMENTS 

Students in the Athletic Training major must apply for formal acceptance 
into the major in spring of the freshman year while those in the other 
concentrations must apply in spring of the sophomore year. Failure to do so 
results in an automatic change of status to “pre-major.” 

RESPONSIBILITY 

An above-average level of achievement in responsibilities within the major 
should be demonstrated. Measurement will be determined by the letters of 
recommendation, documentation of required clinical observations and 
career portfolio. 

COOPERATION 

An above-average level of teamwork with all members of the Sports 
Medicine faculty and with fellow students should be achieved. 
Determination of achievement will be reflected in the recommendation 
letters. 

PROBLEM SOLVING / DECISION MAKING SKILLS 

Applicants will demonstrate the ability to make accurate and reliable 
decisions in theory and in practical or clinical situations. 

COMMUNICATION SKILLS 

Students will demonstrate ability to express thoughts and ideas both 
verbally and in writing. 

ACADEMIC 

Athletic Training and Exercise Science: Achieve and maintain an overall QPA 
of 2.65 or better. 

Pre-Physical Therapy, Pre-Physician Assistant, Pre-Occupational Therapy 
and Pre-Medicine: Achieve and maintain an overall QPA of 3.1 in the 
sophomore year, 3.20 in the junior year and 3.30 in the senior year. 

REVIEW BOARD 

The Review Board consists of three members from disciplines appropriately 
related to the student’s chosen academic concentration. Deliberations of the 

Board will take place near the end of the student’s sophomore year and at 
other times when the department chair deems necessary. 

EVALUATION PROCESS 

In the overall Pre-Med, Pre-Physical Therapy, Pre-Physician Assistant, and 
Pre-Occupational Therapy evaluation process, each of three members of the 
review board will be able to award each student a maximum of 100 points, 
constituting a maximum score of 300 points per student. A minimum 
achievement of 225 points will be necessary for acceptance into the Sports 
Medicine major program. An appeal process is available for students who 
are dismissed. The Pre-med, Pre-occupational therapy, Pre-physician 
assistant, and Pre-PT student will receive official acceptance into the 
concentration if 225 review board points are acquired and an overall GPA of 

3.1 is achieved. Probationary status will be granted if 225 points are 
acquired and an overall GPA between 3.00 and 3.10 is achieved. The 
probationary period for all Sports Medicine majors includes the upcoming 
academic summer sessions and the following fall semester. 
Refer to the description of the Athletic Training or Exercise Science majors in 
order to see the board requirements for those students. 

NOTE: It is made clear that a student who is advised to discontinue the 
Sports Medicine major will find that a lateral move to a related science 
major is very difficult without having to take more than 121 credits due to 
the stringent science requirements in related fields. This is a risk that the 
student knowingly assumes when he or she accepts initial acceptance into 
the Sports Medicine major. 

APPEAL PROCESS 

Any student dismissed from the Sports Medicine major may apply for re-
admittance to the program during the next session of the Review Board. The 
eligibility of the individual will be determined by the board using the same 
criteria as is used for accepting a new student into the program. 

Anyone using the appeal process should contact the department chair one 
semester prior to the Review Board session to initiate the process. 

GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS 

Students who have been accepted into the Sports Medicine major by the 
Review Board must acquire the progressive G.P.A. for each year, which is 

3.10 for sophomore year, 3.20 in the junior year and 3.30 in the senior year. 
All students must complete the required clinical observation hours for their 
declared health profession. Half of the designated hours should be acquired 
through Sports Medicine Department arranged clinical sites in the local area. 
All required courses in the designated area of concentration must be 
successfully completed along with completion of the student’s 
baccalaureate research project in their senior year. All seniors are required to 
present their research proposals and findings in a department research 
symposium in the spring of their senior year. 

Refer to the Athletic Training and Exercise Science major program 
descriptions for graduation requirements. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Sports Medicine 150 Sports Medicine 

Pre-physical and Pre-physician assistant students must complete 200 hours 
of documented observation with various licensed health care professionals 
within their designated career field and one orthopedic surgery. Premedicine 
and Pre-occupational therapy students must complete 100 
documented hours of physician observation and observe one orthopedic 
surgery. No major course may be taken on a pass-fail basis and students 
who earn less than a B in any major course or lab must repeat the course or 
lab. 
Note that some of the requirements for the major also satisfy specific Reach 
Curriculum requirements. Students who are not majors (including contract 
majors) may not take or challenge courses offered by the Sports Medicine 
faculty without written permission from the department chairperson. 

CORE SPORTS MEDICINE COURSES 

SPMD 155 Personal Health Science 3 credits 
SPMD 162 Introduction to Sports Medicine 3 credits 
SPMD 263 Nutrition for Health Professionals 3 credits 
SPMD 360 Sport/Health Fitness Management 3 credits 
SPMD 365 Kinesiology 3 credits 
SPMD 366 Kinesiology Lab 1 credit 
SPMD 380 Exercise Physiology 3 credits 
SPMD 381 Exercise Physiology Lab 1 credit 
SPMD 464 Medical Terminology for Health Sciences 2 credits 
SPMD 480 Research Methods I 2 credits 
SPMD 481 Research Methods II 2 credits 
SPMD 483 Research Methods Lab 1 credit 
BIO 334 Human Anatomy 3 credits 
BIO 335 Human Anatomy Lab 1 credit 
BIO 344 Human Physiology 3credits 
BIO 345 Human Physiology Lab 1 credit 
Soc/Pol 330 Intro to Social Statistics 3 credits 
PSYC 101 Intro to Psychology 3 credits 
ATHLETIC TRAINING MAJOR 

Refer to the Athletic Training Major curriculum description in the university 
catalog. 

EXERCISE SCIENCE MAJOR 

Refer to the Exercise Science Major Curriculum description in the university 
catalog. 

TRANSFER/UNDECLARED STUDENTS 

Refer to the Sports Medicine Department admission requirements 
description for student transfer information. 

PRE-PHYSICAL THERAPY CONCENTRATION 

Pre-physical therapy, assists students in preparing for acceptance into a 
doctoral program of physical therapy. The Pre-physical therapy student has 
the opportunity to utilize the contractual guaranteed slots in Gannon 
University D.P.T. program upon graduation. The pre-P.T. student also has 
the availability to apply in their freshman year for the 3/3 expedited B.S. in 
Sports Medicine and D.P.T. from Gannon University. One student will be 
selected by the Pre-Physical Therapy coordinator and department 
chairperson for this opportunity. 

Pre-physical therapy students must acquire at least 100 of the 200 required 
volunteer clinical observation hours in various physical therapy settings 
before the end of the sophomore year. Documentation of the required 200 
clinical hours must be demonstrated prior to graduation. 100 of the 200 
must be completed utilizing departmental clinical site arrangements. 
Numerous physical therapy settings with local hospitals, clinics and private 
practices are available through departmental arrangements. The prephysical 
therapy student will complete courses that teach orthopedic 
evaluation and recognition of sports related injuries. The student is required 
to observe one orthopedic surgical procedure. It is strongly recommended to 
have some form of transportation in order to attend the required clinical 
rotations. 

The following are courses that must be completed along with the major core 

requirements: 
SOC 108 Human Growth and Development 3 credits 
BIO 142 Cellular and Molecular Biology 3 credits 
BIO 143 Cell and Molecular Biology Lab 1 credit 
SPMD 161 Assessment Injury Management I 3 credits 
SPMD 262 Assessment Injury Management II 3 credits 
SPMD 264 Assessment Injury Management III 3 credits 
CHEM 121 General Chemistry I 3 credits 
CHEM 122 General Chemistry I Lab 1 credit 
CHEM 131 General Chemistry II 3 credits 
CHEM 132 General Chemistry II Lab 1 credit 
PHYS 101 Principles of Physics I 3 credits 
PHYS 103 Principles of Physics I Lab 1 credit 
Or 
PHYS 201 General Physics I 3 credits 
PHYS 203 General Physics I Lab 1 credit 
PHYS 102 Principles of Physics II 3 credits 
PHYS 106 Principles of Physics II Lab 1 credit 
Or 
PHYS 202 General Physics II 3 credits 
PHYS 206 General Physics II Lab 1 credit 
ATR 267 Therapeutic Modalities 3 credits 
Psychology (200 and above) 3 credits 

Suggested electives: Specific prerequisite courses identified for individual 
doctoral physical therapy programs. 

PRE-MEDICAL CONCENTRATION 

Another area of concentration is the pre-medical with an orthopedic 
emphasis. The pre-medical student will focus and learn orthopedic 
evaluation hands on skills to prevent, manage and recognize sports related 
injuries. It enables students to prepare themselves for medical school or 
chiropractic school and to work toward a special emphasis in the field of 
orthopedics. Students will meet regularly with the University’s pre-health 
advisor/committee and Sports Medicine department pre-medicine 
coordinator to arrange for preparing and taking MCATs, shadowing, and 
preparing to appear for an interview before the pre-med advisory board. 
They are required to be involved in at least 100 hours of work, service, or 
observation in an appropriate health/medical setting. Opportunities are 
available for observation of Sports Medicine physicians in numerous 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Sports Medicine 151 Sports Medicin151 Sports Medicine 


settings. The pre-medicine student is required to observe one orthopedic 
surgical procedure. It is strongly recommended to have transportation to 
attend required clinical rotations. 
The following major courses must be completed along with the major core 
courses: SPMD 365 Kinesiology and SPMD 366 Kinesiology Lab are an 
elective from the major core for Pre-Med students only. 
BIO 146 Ecology/Evolutionary Biology 3 credits 
BIO 147 Ecology/Evolutionary Biology Lab 1 credit 
BIO 200 Microbiology 3 credits 
BIO 201 Microbiology Lab 1 credit 
BIO 142 Cellular and Molecular Biology 3 credits 
BIO 143 Cell and Molecular Biology Lab 1 credit 
BIO 370 Cellular Biochemistry 3 credits 
BIO 371 Cellular Biochemistry Lab 1 credit 
BIO 310 Genetics 3 credits 
BIO 311 Genetics Lab 1 credit 
CHEM 121 General Chemistry I 3 credits 
CHEM 122 General Chemistry I Lab 1 credit 
CHEM 131 General Chemistry II 3 credits 
CHEM 132 General Chemistry II Lab 1 credit 
SOC 108 Human Growth and Development 3 credits 
CHEM 240 Organic Chemistry 3 credits 
CHEM 241 Organic Chemistry I Lab 1 credit 
CHEM 242 Organic Chemistry II 3 credits 
CHEM 243 Organic Chemistry II Lab 1 credit 
PHYS 101 Principles of Physics I 3 credits 
PHYS 103 Principles of Physics I Lab 1 credit 
PHYS 102 Principles of Physics II 3 credits 
PHYS 106 Principles of Physics II Lab 1 credit 
SPMD 161 Assessment Injury Management I 3 credits 
SPMD 262 Assessment Injury Management II 3 credits 
SPMD 264 Assessment Injury Management III 3 credits 
Suggested Electives: 
BIO 330/331 Immunology and Lab 4 credits 

PRE-PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT CONCENTRATION 

The Pre-Physician Assistant program provides the student with the 
necessary pre-requisites and qualifications for entrance into a physician 
assistant master degree level program. This curriculum will focus on the 
prevention, care and management of injuries accursed to the physically 
active and team sports individual. Orthopedic and general health hands-on 
evaluation skills will be completed by this student. Observation with local 
licensed physician assistants in an orthopedic/sports medicine clinic is 
available to the student. It is strongly suggested that students within this 
concentration arrange clinical observation opportunities in their local 
residential area and also acquire summer employment in an allied health 
field setting such as and EMT or phlebotomy. Qualified candidates from this 
curriculum will have preference for acceptance into the master’s degree 
physician assistant program at Mercyhurst University 
The following major courses must be completed along with the major core 
courses: 
BIO 120 Human Biology 3 credits 
BIO 121 Human Biology Lab 1 credit 
BIO 142 Cellular and Molecular Biology 3 credits 

BIO 143 Cell and Molecular Biology Lab 1 credit 
BIO 200 Microbiology 3 credits 
BIO 201 Microbiology Lab 1 credit 
BIO 310 Genetics 3 credits 
BIO 311 Genetics Lab 1 credit 
CHEM 121 General Chemistry I 3 credits 
CHEM 122 General Chemistry I Lab 1 credit 
CHEM 131 General Chemistry II 3 credits 
CHEM 132 General Chemistry II Lab 1 credit 
CHEM 240 Organic Chemistry I 3 credits 
CHEM 241 Organic Chemistry I Lab 1 credit 
CHEM 242 Organic Chemistry II 3 credits 
CHEM 243 Organic Chemistry II Lab 1 credit 
CHEM 331 Biochemistry I 3 credits 
CHEM 332 Biochemistry I Lab 1 credit 
SOC 108 Human Growth and Development 3 credits 
PSYC 241 Developmental Psychology 3 credits 
Or 
PSYC 211 Abnormal Psychology 3 credits 
SPMD 161 Assessment Injury Management I 3 credits 
SPMD 262 Assessment Injury Management II 3 credits 
SPMD 264 Assessment Injury Management III 3 credits 
PRE-OCCUPATIONAL THERAPY CONCENTRATION 

The Pre-Occupational Therapy concentration prepares and qualifies the 
student for entrance into a master degree level program in occupational 
therapy. This concentration will focus on the physically active population 
with special physical needs. The pre-occupational therapy student will 
observe registered occupational therapists working with children receiving 
care and treatment at the local Shriners Hospital for Children. Care of 
physically active military veterans with physical disabilities will also be 
emphasized within the curriculum. 
The following major courses must be completed along with the major core 
courses: 

CHEM 101 Chemical Principles 3 credits 

CHEM 102 Chemical Principles Laboratory 1 credit 

BIO 120 Human Biology 3 credits 

BIO 121 Human Biology Lab 1 credit 

BIO 142 Cellular and Molecular Biology 3 credits 

BIO 143 Cell and Molecular Biology Lab 1 credit 

SOC 108 Human Growth and Development 3 credits 

PHYS 101 Principles of Physics I 3 credits 

PHYS 103 Principles of Physics I Lab 1 credit 

PSYC 241 Developmental Psychology 3 credits 

Or 

PSYC 211 Abnormal Psychology 3 credits 

SOC 100 Introduction to Sociology 3 credits 

SPMD 207 Orientation to Occupational Therapy 3 credits 

SPMD 307 Application of Occupational Therapy 3 credits 

SPMD 372 Therapeutic Management / Modalities 3 credits 

and Rehabilitation 
Sociology course 200 or above. 3 credits 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


Sustainability Studies 152 Sustainability Studies 

Sustainability Studies 


INTRODUCTION 

Recognized increasingly for its commitment to renewable energy, waste 
reduction, and student engagement in a range of environmental initiatives, 
Mercyhurst University offers a B.A. in Sustainability Studies, a minor in 
Sustainability Studies, Sustainability Studies concentrations in Chemistry 
and Biology, and a one year post-baccalaureate certificate in Sustainability 
Studies. Whether minoring or majoring in Sustainability, students will take 
courses in variety of academic disciplines that contribute courses to the 
program. However they structure their degree, students confront through 
an array of disciplines the immense environmental challenges that 
increasingly shape our world. They are also challenged to develop solutions 
to issues involving energy, climate change, land use and food production, 
sustainable economic development, green building design and more. Based 
on the Erie campus, students in the program are increasingly engaged in 
experiential learning projects aimed at preparing them for positions in a 
broad range of fields upon graduation. An overall minimum GPA of 2.5 is 
required for graduation with a degree in Sustainability Studies. For more 
information, contact Dr. Chris Magoc (History), Dr. Michael Campbell 
(Biology), or Dr. Nick Lang (Geology). 

COURSES REQUIRED 

ENVS 105 Introduction to Environmental Studies 3 credits 
SUST210 Responding to Climate Change 3 credits 
SUST490 Senior Field Experience in Sustainability 3 credits 

ELECTIVES 

CHOOSE ANY ADDITIONAL 9 COURSES FOR THE MAJOR, 4 FOR THE MINOR 
ANTH 301 Origins of Food Production 3 credits 
ANTH/ BIO Plants and People 3 credits 
216 

ANTH/GEOL Dendrochronology 3 credits 
370 
BIO 146 Ecology and Evolutionary Biology Of 3 credits 
Organisms 
BIO 147 Ecology and Evolutionary Biology of 1 credit 
Organism Lab 
BIO 290 Environmental Physiology 3 credits 
BIO 292 Field Ecology 3 credits 
BIO 293 Field Ecology Lab 1 credit 
BIO 410 Microbial Ecology 3 credits 
BIO 411 Microbial Ecology Lab 1 credit 
BIO 424 Restoration Ecology 3 credits 
COMM 419 Environmental Communications 3 credits 
ECON 260 Environmental Economics and Policy 3 credits 

ENG 200 

ENG 328 

ENVS 100 
ENVS 101 
GEOL 100 
GEOL 102 
GEOL 215 
GEOL 216 
GEOL 235 
GEOL 266 
GEOL 260 
GEOL 261 
GEOL 306 
GEOL 307 
GEOL 380 
GEOL 440 
GEOL 441 
ID 200 
ID 231 
HIS 221/ 

POLI 229 
POLI 395 
POLI 280 
POLI 321 
PUBH 101 
PUBH 201 
RLST 375 
SCI 170 
SCI 171 
SOC 342 
SUST 102 
SUST 104 
SUST 300 
SUST 399 
SUST 475 

Literary Studies: Environmental 3 credits 
Poetry 
Special Topics in Literature: 3 credits 
Environmental Literature 
Environmental Problem Solving 3 credits 
Environmental Problem Solving Lab 1 credit 
Physical Geology 3 credits 
Physical Geology Lab 1 credit 
Geomorphology 3 credits 
Geomorphology Lab 1 credit 
Paleoclimatology 3 credits 
Paleoclimatology Lab 1 credit 
Hydrogeology 3 credits 
Hydrogeology Lab 1 credit 
Soils 3 credits 
Soils Lab 1 credit 
Remote Sensing 3 credits 
Introduction to GIS 3 credits 
Introduction to GIS Lab 1 credit 
Building Technology 3 credits 
Human Factors Design 3 credits 

U.S. Environmental History 3 credits 
Environmental Politics 3 credits 
Global Environmental Politics 3 credits 
Environmental Law 3 credits 
Foundations of Public Health 3 credits 
Environmental Health 3 credits 
Religion and the Environment 3 credits 
Energy Science 3 credits 
Energy Science Lab 1 credit 
Human Needs and Global Problems 3 credits 
Water Resources and Conservation 3 credits 
Sustainable Organic Gardening 3 credits 
Special Topics in Sustainability 3 credits 
Independent Study in Sustainability 3 credits 
Internship in Sustainability 3 credits 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


World Languages and Cultures 153 World Languages and Cultures 

World Languages and Cultures 

DEPARTMENT CHAIR 

Douglas L. Boudreau, Ph.D. 

FACULTY 

Professors 

Alice Edwards, Ph.D. 

Karen Williams, Ph.D. 

Associate Professor: 

Douglas L. Boudreau, Ph.D. 

Visiting Assistant Professor 

Luyang Wang, Ph.D. 

Instructor: 

Janelle Newman, Ph.D. 

Adjunct Faculty: 

Fr. Steven Simon, J.D. 

INTRODUCTION 

The Department of World Languages and is a vehicle for the development of 
the whole person in a multicultural context through the most basic activities 
of human life: personal expression and social interaction. 

We offer majors in French, Spanish, Russian Studies and International 
Business, as well as French Education and Spanish Education. Students can 
also pursue minors in Arabic and Islamic Studies, Asian Studies, Chinese, 
French, Russian Studies and Spanish. Through these programs, the 
Department prepares students for a future that demands a high level of 
linguistic proficiency and cultural competency. 

MISSION STATEMENT 

The Department of World Languages and Cultures supports the mission of 
the university courses fostering a deep understanding of each individual’s 
critical role in our global community through meaningful language 
acquisition and cultural studies. 

The Department promotes the acquisition of indispensable skills in 
intercultural communication for our students’ future careers and citizenship. 
Appreciating the fact that one cannot truly understand a people without 
understanding their language, the Department’s focus in on quality, 
student-centered instruction in the reading, writing, speaking and listening 
comprehension skills necessary to function effectively in our target 
languages. 

In order to foster awareness of world cultures, the Department supports 
study abroad experiences, sponsors speakers and other events on campus, 
and serves as a valuable resource to the greater Erie community. 

The Department of World Languages and Cultures works to foster respect for 
others, an openness to difference, and the ability to establish relationships 
through transcultural communication. 

PROGRAM STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 

Speak and understand target language at the intermediate high level or 
better, as detailed in the ACTFL Proficiency Guidelines 

Read and write in target language at the intermediate high level or better 
(ACTFL). 

Demonstrate cultural proficiency in the culture(s) that use of the target 
language. 

Discuss in the target language, both orally and in writing, literary and visual 
texts or cultural artifacts of the target culture. 

Conduct and produce research in the target language. 

Demonstrate understanding of second language acquisition and the history 
of foreign language pedagogy (education majors). 

Demonstrate the ability to apply understanding in practice teaching 
situations and to analyze and critique the teaching of others (education 
majors). 

MAJOR REQUIREMENTS 

All majors must maintain an overall 2.5 GPA and at least a 2.75 GPA in major 
courses. French Education or Spanish Education majors must also meet all 
the requirements of the Education Department, including their GPA 
minimums. 

All majors and those students seeking teaching certification are expected to 
maintain a portfolio which will be important for assessment at Sophomore 
Review. An outline of requirements for the portfolio, which includes written 
and oral work, can be obtained from the student’s language advisor or from 
the department chair. 

Students with previous experience in a language offered by the department 
(including native speakers) must consult with the department faculty to be 
placed into an appropriate level course. The Department reserves the right to 
reassign students whose level of experience is not appropriate for the course. 

SOPHOMORE REVIEW 

During spring semester of the sophomore year, the Department reviews the 
student’s academic record, the language portfolio, and recommendations 
from professors to determine academic progress. At this time, students are 
formally invited into the major and are informed in writing of the 
Department’s decision. 

SENIOR REVIEW 

Spring semester of the senior year, students will meet with department 
faculty to conduct an exit review. Seniors will also participate in an oral 
proficiency interview in the spring of their senior year. Additional details can 
be found on the departmental website. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


World Languages and Cultures 154 World Languages and Cultures 

FRENCH MAJOR 

Students may choose a major program in French. Entrance into the major 
program is determined by the successful completion of the Introduction and 
Intermediate sequence or by the demonstration of equivalent skills on the 
CLEP, Advanced Placement, or International Baccalaureate examinations. 
Students must also successfully pass through the Sophomore Review 
process before formal admittance to the major is granted. 

a) Required Sequence (in French): 

FREN 125 French Culture 3 credits 
OR 
FREN 126 Francophone Cultures 3 credits 
OR 
FREN 130 French Literature in Translation 3 credits 
OR 
FREN 132 French Theater in Translation 3 credits 
OR 
FREN 135 Topics in French/Francophone Literature 3 credits 
FREN 204 Intermediate French II 3 credits 
FREN 208 Introduction to Literature 3 credits 
FREN 209 Introduction to French Civilization 3 credits 
FREN 210 Conversation/Composition I 3 credits 
FREN 305 Seminar in Culture Literature 3 credits 
FREN 308 Phonetics 3 credits 
FREN 310 Seminar: Translation 3 credits 
WL 314 Introduction to Sociolinguistics 3 credits 

b) Elective Sequence: Majors must choose at least two electives 
in their major language: 

FREN 230 French for Business3 credits 
FREN 300 Conversation/Composition II 3 credits 
FREN 315 French Cinema 3 credits 
FREN 316 (Abroad Experience) 3 credits 
Other courses as offered by the Department 

SPANISH MAJOR 

Students choose a major program in Spanish. Entrance into the major 
program is determined by the successful completion of the Introduction and 
Intermediate sequence or by the demonstration of equivalent skills on the 
CLEP, AP, or International Baccalaureate examinations. As stated above, 
students must also successfully pass through the Sophomore Review process 
before formal admittance to the major is granted. 

a) Required Sequence (in Spanish): 

SPAN 125 Latin American Culture 3 credits 
OR 
SPAN 130 Latin American Literature 3 credits 
SPAN 204 Intermediate Spanish II 3 credits 
SPAN 208 Introduction to Literature 3 credits 
SPAN 209 Introduction to Spanish Civilization 3 credits 
SPAN 210 Conversation/Composition I 3 credits 
SPAN 305 Seminar in Culture/Literature 3 credits 
SPAN 308 Phonetics 3 credits 
SPAN 310 Seminar: Translation 3 credits 
WL 314 Introduction to Sociolinguistics 3 credits 

b) Elective Sequence: Majors must choose at least two electives in 
their major language: 

SPAN 230 Spanish for Business 3 credits 
SPAN 300 Conversation/Composition II 3 credits 
SPAN 314 Hispanic Sociolinguistics 3 credits 
SPAN 316 Abroad Experience 3 credits 

Other courses as offered by the Department 

FRENCH OR SPANISH EDUCATION MAJOR 

Students may choose a major program in French or Spanish Education. 
Entrance into the major program is determined by the successful completion 
of the Introduction and Intermediate sequence or by the demonstration of 
equivalent skills on the CLEP, AP, or International Baccalaureate 
examinations. Students must also successfully pass through the Sophomore 
Review process before formal admittance to the major is granted. In order to 
receive this degree and certification in French or Spanish Education, 
students must complete all major courses indicated for the French or 
Spanish major as well as meet all of the requirements outlined in the 
Education Department section of the university catalog for K-12 
certification. 


In addition to the Education curriculum, students must take: 
WL 312 Second-Language Acquisition 3 credits 


and one of the following courses: 

ANTH 107 Language and Culture 3 credits 
ANTH 109 World Geography 3 credits 
ANTH 112 World Cultures 3 credits 

Please refer to all standards, policies and admission/retention criteria as 
specified for all Education majors seeking a degree from Mercyhurst 
University and certification by the Pennsylvania Department of Education. 

RUSSIAN STUDIES MAJOR 

Students may major in Russian Studies, which combines courses in 
language, literature, culture and history by following the sequence below: 
Eight courses in Russian language 
One course in Russian culture 
One course in Russian history 
Two courses in Russian literature or 
One literature and Sociolinguistics (WL 314) 

INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 

The Department collaborates with the Walker College of Business in offering 
a major in International Business, which combines the study of international 
business courses in marketing, economics, law, finance and management 
with courses in language and culture. Interested students should consult the 
Business section of the catalogue for major requirements. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


World Languages and Cultures 155 World Languages and Cultures 

CHINESE, FRENCH, OR SPANISH MINOR 

Most language minors are required to complete any eight courses in their 
language/culture area. However, students who begin their language study 
at the level of Intermediate I or higher may complete the minor with seven 
classes instead of eight. Minors may only satisfy two requirements with a 
course taught in English (i.e., SPAN 125, FREN 125/126, ASIA 125). Students 
must maintain a 2.5 GPA in the minor. 

AREA STUDIES MINORS: ASIAN STUDIES, ARABIC &ISLAMIC STUDIES 
AND RUSSIAN STUDIES: 

The area studies minors offer interdisciplinary opportunities to study the 
language, culture, religion, history and politics of a region. Students must 
maintain a GPA of 2.5 in the minor. 

ARABIC AND ISLAMIC STUDIES MINOR: 

Students will take seven courses, a minimum of four of which must be in 
Arabic language. The remaining three classes may include any of those 
listed below, or other relevant courses as offered. Students who are unsure 
as to whether a course can be counted toward the minor should consult the 
program director: 

ARAB 250 Directed Studies 3 credits 
FREN 126 Francophone Cultures 3 credits 
HIST 291 History of Modern Middle East 3 credits 
POLI 240 Comparative Politics: Africa 3 credits 
RLST 208 Islam 3 credits 

ASIAN STUDIES MINOR 

Students will take eight courses, with a minimum of four in an Asian 
language. The remaining four courses may include any culture or literature 
courses as offered by the Asian Studies or Chinese programs and/or relevant 
courses as offered by other departments such as those listed below. 
Students who are unsure as to whether a course can be counted toward the 
minor should consult the program director. 

CHNS 110 Far Eastern Ideographs 3 credits 
HIST 275 History of Central Asia 3 credits 
RLST 206 Hinduism 3 credits 
RLST 207 Buddhism 3 credits 
POLI 241 Comparative Politics: Asia 3 credits 

RUSSIAN STUDIES MINOR 

Students will take eight courses (24 credits), a minimum of four in the 
language as advised. The remaining courses may include additional 
language, or culture, or literature courses as offered by the Russian program 
and/or relevant courses offered by other departments (for example, in 
History or Political Science). Students who are unsure as to whether a 
course can be counted toward the minor should consult the program 
director. 

ESL PROGRAM SPECIALIST CERTIFICATE 

Education majors may choose to pursue certification as an ESL (English as a 
Second Language) Specialist. Certification requires completion of the 18credit 
hour (6-course) program described below: 

WL 101/501 Culturally and Linguistically Diverse 3 credits 
Learners 
WL 312/512 Second Language Acquisition* 3 credits 
WL 314/514 Introduction to Sociolinguistics 3 credits 
ELL 301/515 Supporting Literacy for English-Language 3 credits 
Learners* 
ELL 400/500 Teaching English as a Second Language: 3 credits 
Issues in Theory and Practice* 
ELL 405/505 Professional and Program Development 3 credits 
for English Language Learners 

*Includes a 20-hour practicum 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 156 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 

ACCT 101. PRINCIPLES OF ACCOUNTING I: FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING 

This course introduces the basics of financial accounting for business 
enterprises with a focus on accounting for corporations. Topics include the 
theory of the financial accounting principles that guide the preparation of 
financial accounting information and the role of accounting in capital 
markets as well as the ethical standards imposed on accountants. The course 
provides a thorough review of the accounting cycle and the operating areas 
of the balance sheet with special focus on how accounting transactions 
affect the financial statements and analysis of financial statement 
information. 3 credits. 

ACCT 102. PRINCIPLES OF ACCOUNTING II: MANAGERIAL ACCOUNTING 

This course presents accounting information used for internal business 
management. The focus of the course is using accounting information to 
better aid in the planning, controlling and evaluation of company 
performance. Topics include budgeting, job costing, product pricing, break-
even analysis and decision models. Prerequisite: ACCT 101. 3 credits. 

ACCT 201. INTERMEDIATE ACCOUNTING I 

A detailed examination of the development of specific accounting theories 
relating to the principles of valuation of the major balance sheet accounts. 
Prerequisite: ACCT 101. Offered Fall semester only. 3 credits. 

ACCT 202. INTERMEDIATE ACCOUNTING II 

A continuation of Intermediate Accounting I which deals with accounting 
theories relating to the valuation of the major balance sheet accounts. 
Prerequisite: ACCT 201. Offered Spring semester only. 3 credits. 

ACCT 230. TAX ACCOUNTING 

A study of the Internal Revenue Code with primary emphasis on the 
provisions affecting individual taxpayers. Major topics include identification 
of items of gross income, business deductions, qualifications for 
dependents, itemized deductions, filing status and computation of taxable 
income. Prerequisite: ACCT 101. Offered Fall semester only. 3 credits. 

ACCT 335. CORPORATE TAX ACCOUNTING 

A Study of the Internal Revenue Code as it relates to corporations, 
subchapter S corporations, partnerships and other business entities. Major 
topics include a review of the tax implications of capital contributions and 
withdrawals, tax research and various special tax situations. Prerequisite: 
ACCT 230. Offered Spring semester only. 3 credits. 

ACCT 340. COST ACCOUNTING 

Examination of accounting techniques for control of material, labor and 
overhead costs in a manufacturing operation. Material includes types of cost 
systems, cost records, job order costing and budget controls. Prerequisites: 
ACCT102, ACCT 201. Offered Spring Semester only. 3 credits. 

ACCT 401. ADVANCED ACCOUNTING 

A study of accounting theories and advanced problems relating to the 
partnership form of business organization; theory and practice of parent and 
subsidiary accounting; consolidated financial statements; and select 

international accounting topics. Prerequisite: ACCT 202. Offered Fall 
semester only. 3 credits. 

ACCT 410. AUDITING 

A study of generally accepted auditing standards and the various types of 
audit reports issued by certified public accountants. Other topics include 
ethical standards, legal liability of auditors, and other types of assurance 
services. Prerequisite: ACCT 202. Offered Spring semester only. 3 credits. 

ACCT 475. ACCOUNTING INTERNSHIP 

An individual work-study experience in an approved business institution. 
Placement of a qualified student in a business setting which involves the 
area of accounting. Junior standing, 2.75 GPA in business courses, and 
written permission of the associate dean or program director. 3 credits. 

ANTH 107. LANGUAGE & CULTURE: INTRODUCTION TO 
ANTHROPOLOGICAL LINGUISTICS 

This course is designed to introduce students to the complex study of 
language and its role in culture and society. We will begin by examining 
what constitutes language. Although not a major portion of the class, 
language structure, including morphology and syntax, will be covered. We 
will examine how language is used by different peoples to construct and 
maintain social values and relationships, worldviews and personal 
identities. Some questions addressed throughout the semester include: How 
do children acquire linguistic competence in their language? How is 
language used by people of different genders, ethnicities, socioeconomic 
classes and geographical placement? This course is primarily lecture-based 
format, but students will have an opportunity to engage in their own 
anthropological linguistic fieldwork. 3 credits. 

ANTH 109. WORLD GEOGRAPHY 

Geography is the branch of knowledge that examines spatial patterns in the 
physical and human environments on the earth. Three geographic themes 
will be explored through an exploration of the world at different scales from 
the global to the regional: Physical/Spatial (physical processes and 
ecosystems), Human Systems (relationship of human populations to the 
landscape and to each other), and Places (regional and local patterns). 
Students will explore current issues in world geography through individual 
research projects. 3 credits. 

ANTH 112. WORLD CULTURES 

In this course, the student is exposed to the basic subject matter and 
methods of modern socio-cultural anthropology. The great diversity of 
contemporary and recently extinct human culture is examined from a 
comparative and evolutionary perspective with an emphasis on the 
differences and similarities between so-called modern state level societies 
and their less complex antecedents. 3 credits. 

ANTH 112. WORLD CULTURES 

In this course, the student is exposed to the basic subject matter and 
methods of modern socio-cultural anthropology. The great diversity of 
contemporary and recently extinct human culture is examined from a 
comparative and evolutionary perspective with an emphasis on the 
differences and similarities between so-called modern state level societies 
and their less complex antecedents. 3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 157 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


ANTH 120. PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY 

Physical anthropology examines the “human animal” from a biological and 
cultural perspective. It is the study of human origins and our contemporary 
and past physical and genetic diversity. Corequisite: ANTH 121. 3 credits. 

ANTH 121. PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY LAB 

This lab course will provide an opportunity for students to obtain hands-on 
experience with human bones, fossil human casts, primate observation and 
forensic anthropology specimens. Corequisite: ANTH 120. 1 credit. 

ANTH 130. ARCHAEOLOGY 

This course examines the methods, goals, and substantive results of 
contemporary anthropological archaeology. An emphasis on the 
archaeological techniques and concepts archaeologists use for making sense 
of the past are stressed, and numerous case studies are presented which 
explore past human practice from the development of human culture 
through to contemporary society, with a particular focus on humanity's 
unique relationship with material cuture and the environment . Corequisite: 
ANTH 131. 3 credits. 

ANTH 131. ARCHAEOLOGY LAB 

This laboratory course provides the student basic exposure to contemporary 
archaeological field methods from both a theoretical and hands-on 
perspective. Topics include: archaeological survey techniques; mapping; 
excavation procedures; screening and data retrieval; field lab processing; 
and documentation. Corequisite: ANTH 130. 1 credit. 

ANTH 200. PREHISTORY OF EASTERN NORTH AMERICA 

The course is designed to introduce students to the prehistory of our 
continent’s eastern “half,” from initial occupation to European contact. We 
will survey the cultural history of this vast and varied region and focus on 
specific issues, problems, and debates that currently dominate research in 
this field. Particular attention will be given to the archaeology of the Great 
Lakes region and Pennsylvania. Prerequisite: ANTH 130. 3 credits. 

ANTH 201. PREHISTORY OF WESTERN NORTH AMERICA 

Anthropology 200 and 201 are designed to thoroughly introduce the 
student to the grand sweep of North American Prehistory. From the initial 
peopling of the New World to the rise of settled village life and the evolution 
of non-state-level societies, the prehistory of North American is presented 
against an ever-changing backdrop of flora, fauna and climate with an 
emphasis on the complex interplay between humans and their 
environmental matrix. Prerequisite: ANTH 130. 3 credits. 

ANTH 202. INDIANS OF EASTERN NORTH AMERICA 

This course addresses the diversity of Eastern North American Indian cultures 
at the time of and immediately subsequent to Euro-American contact. 
Particular emphasis is placed on differences in technology and material 
culture, subsistence strategies, settlement patterns, and environmental 
variability. Prerequisites: ANTH 130, ANTH 112. 3 credits. 

ANTH 203. INDIANS OF WESTERN NORTH AMERICA 

This course addresses the diversity of Western North American Indian 
cultures at the time of and immediately subsequent to Euro-American 
contact. Particular emphasis is placed on differences in technology and 

material culture, subsistence strategies, settlement patterns and 
environmental variability. Prerequisites: ANTH 112, ANTH 130. 3 credits. 

ANTH 204. CULTURES IN CONTACT 

This course examines the interface between Native American and Euro-
American cultures from the arrival of Leif Ericsson in coastal Canada in the 

A.D. 990s through the better-documented landing of Columbus on 12 
October 1492 to the progressive expansion of the frontiers and the ultimate 
displacement, transformation, or extinction of aboriginal eastern North 
American societies. The course focuses on the nature of the contact period as 
it is documented both historically and archaeologically and employs models 
and theoretical constructs from both Old and New World archaeology to 
elucidate the issue of cultures in collision. Prerequisite: ANTH 130. 3 credits. 
ANTH 205. HISTORIC ARCHAEOLOGY 

This course provides students with the basic methods and protocols of 
contemporary historic archaeology. The focus of the course is both thematic 
and historical, focusing on major topics in contemporary historic 
archaeology with case studies focusing on Post-Colombian archaeology in 
North America with an emphasis from initial settlement to early industrial 
development. Prerequisite: ANTH 130. 3 credits. 

ANTH 208. EARLY EUROPEAN PREHISTORY 

This course summarizes and examines the archaeology of Europe from its 
initial colonization ca. 500,000 years ago until the appearance of 
horticulture in the early Holocene. Within an examination of a changing 
environmental matrix, the course stresses the social, material, and symbolic 
development early Europeans. Prerequisite: ANTH 130. 3 credits. 

ANTH 209. LATER EUROPEAN PREHISTORY 

This course chronicles the history of human occupation in Europe for 8000 
years, from the Upper Paleolithic to the emergence of state societies and 
Roman expansion c. 500 B.C. Particular emphasis is placed upon the regional 
cultural variability, the relationship between human communities and their 
landscapes,monument construction, culture contact and trade, the 
development of social stratification and political centralization, and recent 
theoretical conceptualizations of various periods and regions. Students have 
the opportunity to concentrate on particular regional, cultural, and temporal 
problems. Prerequisite: ANTH 130. 3 credits. 

ANTH 212. BIBLICAL ARCHAEOLOGY 

This course examines the later prehistory and early history of Palestine and 
immediately contiguous areas. Emphasis is placed on the archaeological 
elucidation of extant historical documentation and biblical references. 
Prerequisite: ANTH 130. 3 credits. 

ANTH 214. FAR EASTERN PREHISTORY 

This course is designed to introduce the student to the prehistoric 
archaeological record of Northeast Asia. The course will examine the initial 
peopling of the region during the Pleistocene and will emphasize 
subsequent Paleolithic and Neolithic adaptations in North China, Japan, 
Eastern Siberia and the Korean Peninsula. Prerequisite: ANTH 130. 3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 158 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


ANTH 215. IROQUOIAN PREHISTORY** 

A detailed look at the lifeways, material culture, socal-political relations, 
and culture history of the peoples who occupied what we typically consider 
to be the Iroquoian regionfrom the earliest settlement up to and including 
the European contact period. 3 credits. 

ANTH 216. PLANTS AND PEOPLE 

People depend on plants for food, clothing, shelter, medicines, and a host of 
other daily needs. This course examines the varied and complex 
interrelationships between plants and people. Major topics include 
domestication processes, the Green Revolution, intentional and 
unintentional modification of plant communities, and an examination of 
those plants that provide drugs, food, beverages, and fibers necessary to 
daily life. 3 credits. 

ANTH 219. CONCEPTS IN ARCHAEOLOGY 

This course is intended to provide sophomore level 
Anthropology/Archaeology students with a contemporary heuristic 
framework for successful interpretation of archaeological signatures. Topics 
only introduced in the Freshmen level sequence of Archaeology and World 
Cultures that pertain to the archaeological interpretation of past human 
practices and, the archaeological techniques for reconstructing past human 
practices will explored in depth, thus providing a necessary foundation for 
upper division coursework in Anthropology/Archaeology. The course is 
divided into eight thematic areas, and encounter with course topics will be 
obtained via directed reading, lectures, seminar style discussion and 
projects, and the preparation of essay papers. 3 credits. 

ANTH 220. NATIVE AMERICANS IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY 

This course is intended to introduce students to the diverse lives and 
livelihoods of Native Americans in contemporary society with an emphasis 
on the range of issues facing Native peoples today. The course is not an 
historical survey summarizing the rich cultures of the several hundred-plus 
indigenous nations of North America. Rather, it provides an overview of the 
salient issues affecting contemporary Native peoples’ social, cultural, 
economic and political activities. Lecture topics include, but are not limited 
to, colonial legacies, popular culture and stereotypes, indigenous identities, 
tribal-federal relationships, sovereignty, cultural survival and revitalization, 
research issues and ethics. Prerequisite: ANTH 112. 3 credits. 

ANTH 224. ARCHAEOLOGICAL FIELD METH 

This course is designed to expose students to the full spectrum of field 
methods now in use in contemporary anthropological archaeology. The 
rationale, technical details, and expected results of a wide array of field 
methods are presented in the context of the location, characterization, and 
full scale data recovery of prehistoric and historic archaeological sites. 
Prerequisite: ANTH 130. Corequisite: ANTH 225. 3 credits. 

ANTH 225. ARCHAEOLOG FIELD METH LAB 

Corequisite: ANTH 224. 1 credit. 

ANTH 227. ETHNOGRAPHIC FIELD METHODS 

This course provides students with an opportunity to combine qualitative 
ethnographic field work with an anthropological analysis of ethnicity, 
socioeconomic position, and gender in contemporary United States society. 
Students have an opportunity to engage in observation, conduct interviews, 
and learn to write, transcribe, code, and analyze field notes while engaged 
in their own mini field work project. Each student designs his or her own 
project, choosing the setting and topic. Classes alternate between discussion 
of research readings, and ethnographic case project development, 
descriptive writing, and social behavior analysis. Prerequisite: ANTH 112. 3 
credits. 

ANTH 228. ETHNOGRAPHIC FIELD METH II 

This course is designed to build upon ethnographic field techniques students 
learned in ANTH 227/Ethnographic Field Methods and expose students to a 
full spectrum of field methods utilized by contemporary socio-cultural 
anthropologists. As part of the coursework, students will participate in an 
ethnographic field school here in Erie, PA and engage in “anthropology at 
home” This course combines classroom study, as well as fieldtrips, with 
practical experience. Students have the opportunity to engage in their own 
fieldwork project, choosing the ethnographic techniques most appropriate 
to the particular project, analyzing, and finally writing up and presenting 
the results of the project. Prerequisite: ANTH 227. 3 credits. 

ANTH 236. ANALYTICAL LAB METHODS IN PREHISTORIC 
ARCHAEOLOGY 

This course is designed to acquaint the student with the methods and 
techniques of processing, classification, analysis, curation, and 
documentation of the major classes of prehistoric artifactual evidence. The 
specific classes of data to be examined include, but are not limited to, lithic, 
ceramics, perishables, macrofloral remains, pollen and phytoliths, and 
biomolecular residues. Analysis of these materials will also involve 
addressing a number of anthropological themes such as dietary 
reconstruction, paleoenvironmental reconstruction, and construction of 
chronologies. The laboratory component of the courses is designed to allow 
students to employ the methods and techniques of artifact analysis using 
various “live” collections curated by the Mercyhurst Archaeological Institute. 
Prerequisite: ANTH 130. Corequisite: ANTH 237. 3 credits. 

ANTH 237. ANALYTICAL LAB METHODS IN PREHISTORIC 
ARCHAEOLOGY LAB 

Prerequisite: ANTH 130. Corequisite: ANTH 236. 1 credit. 

ANTH 238. ANALYTICAL LAB METHODS IN HISTORIC ARCHAEOLOGY 

This course will introduce students to the analytical and classificatory 
methods used in the treatment and processing of historic materials 
recovered from archaeological investigations. Emphasis will be placed on 
colonial and nineteenth century materials of the eastern United States. 
Students will assist in the analysis of materials from ongoing Mercyhurst 
Archaeological Institute field projects. Prerequisite: ANTH 130. Corequisite: 
ANTH 239. 3 credits. 

ANTH 239. ANALYTICAL LAB METHODS IN HISTORIC ARCHAEOLOGY 
LAB 

Prerequisite: ANTH 130. Corequisite: ANTH 238. 1 credit. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 159 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


ANTH 240. HUMAN ADAPTATION 

This course examines the biological, physiological and evolutionary 
responses of the human body to short and long-term stresses, and cultural 
adaptations to those stresses. Studies of native populations living in 
stressful environments will be discussed and include the effects of extreme 
heat and cold, solar radiation, and high altitude hypoxia. Other issues to be 
examined include the problems of malnourishment, disease, and cultural 
solutions to those problems. To provide an understanding of how these 
stresses affect the human body, a number of biological topics will be 
touched upon including growth and development, physiology, genetics, and 
human diversity. Prerequisites: ANTH 120, BIO 120. 3 credits. 

ANTH 242. FORENSIC ANTHROPOLOGY 

The value of the application of anthropological principles in the field of 
criminal investigation has only recently been realized. This course will 
explore methods by which forensic anthropological principles are used to 
search for and recover evidence from a variety of crime scenes, as well as 
reconstruct the life history of the human victim. Prerequisites: MATH 170, 
CHEM 121, CHEM 122, BIO 146. 3 credits. 

ANTH 250. ZOOARCHAEOLOGY 

The analysis of faunal remains from archaeological sites can provide 
valuable information regarding prehistoric diet, seasonality, and 
socioeconomic factors. In this course, all aspects of zooarchaeology will be 
discussed, and students will analyze a vertebrate faunal assemblage from an 
archaeological site and produce a publishable-quality report. Prerequisites: 
ANTH 120, ANTH 130. Corequisite: ANTH 251. 3 credits. 

ANTH 251. ZOOARCHAEOLOGY LAB 

Corequisite: ANTH 250. 1 credit. 

ANTH 270. PALEOANTHROPOLOGY I 

This two-course sequence (ANTH 270/ANTH 272) follows the development 
of the human species from our remote primate forbearers through the 
appearance of fully modern Homo sapiens. The student is familiarized with 
the methods and the data of human paleontology and comparative 
primatology and is shown the complex relationships which exist between 
biological and cultural evolution. Part I focuses on primate evolution and the 
evolutionary history of Australopithecines. Prerequisites: ANTH 120, ANTH 

130. 3 credits. 
ANTH 272. PALEOANTHROPOLOGY II 

Part II will deal with the biological and cultural history of the genus Homo 
from its roots in the Plio-Pleistocene through the Holocene until the 
Neolithic. Prerequisites: ANTH 120, ANTH 130, ANTH 270. 3 credits. 

ANTH 300. HUNTERS AND GATHERERS 

Foraging lifestyles are extensively explored in this course, which seeks to 
examine the particular manner in which hunters and gatherers engage with 
the landscape and their local environment. The consequences of this 
engagement for socio-political relations, systems of knowledge, and the 
production of material culture will also be addressed. Case studies of 
foragers are examined in both prehistoric and ethnographic perspective, as 
well as their relationships with groups practicing other subsistence patterns. 
Prerequisite: ANTH 112. 3 credits. 

ANTH 301. ORIGINS OF FOOD PRODUCTION 

This course examines the origins of horticultural, agricultural, and pastoral 
subsistence strategies throughout the Old and New Worlds during the 
Holocene. Models and processes of domestication, the relationship between 
humans and their local floral and faunal communities, routes of 
transmission, and attendant effects on and consequences for social systems 
are covered. Prerequisite: ANTH 130. 3 credits. 

ANTH 326. HUMAN OSTEOLOGY I 

The focus of this class will be the identification of complete and fragmentary 
human skeletal and dental remains. Students will be required to be able to 
identify isolated bone specimens by touch only. Introductory lectures will 
deal with growth and development of osseous and dental structures, 
variation in biological tissues, and modification of these tissues through 
traumatic, pathologic and taphonomic factors. Prerequisites: ANTH 120, 
ANTH 121. Corequisite: ANTH 327. 3 credits. 

ANTH 327. HUMAN OSTEOLOGY I LAB 

Laboratory component of the Human Osteology course in which students 
will work with human skeletal and dental remains derived from biological 
supply houses, prehistoric archaeological assemblages and forensic case 
contexts. Corequisite: ANTH 326. 1 credit. 

ANTH 328. PRIMITIVE TECHNOLOGY 

This course provides the rationale and protocols for the analysis, 
documentation, and interpretation of both durable and perishable 
artifactual remains from prehistoric and historic archaeological sites. The 
analysis of lithic material, bone and wooden artifacts, cordage, basketry, 
and textiles are emphasized. A treatment of prehistoric and historic ceramic 
analysis is also provided. Prerequisites: ANTH 130, ANTH 236, ANTH 237. 3 
credits. 

ANTH 332. PERISHABLES ANALYSIS 

This course provides the rationale and protocols for the analysis, 
documentation, and interpretation of twined, coiled, and plated basketry, 
along with cordage by-products. The delineation and recordation 
procedures of technological attributes, as well as the identification of plant 
and other organic raw materials used in the construction of perishable 
materials will also be emphasized. Prerequisites: ANTH 130, 237. 
Corequisite: ANTH 335. 3 credits. 

ANTH 333. HUMAN SKELETAL BIOLOGY II 

This course serves as a continuation of Human Osateology in which methods 
in the identification of osteological remains, determination of chronological 
age, sex, ancestry and stature are discussed in detail. Skeletal pathology, 
trauma and non-metric/metric data will be also included. Prerequisites: 
ANTH 326, ANTH 327. Corequesite Anth 334. 3 credits. 

ANTH 334. HUMAN SKELETAL BIO II LAB 

Prerequisites: ANTH 326, ANTH 327. Corequesite Anth 333. 1 credit. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 160 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


ANTH 335. PERISHABLES ANALYSIS LAB 

The perishables analysis laboratory will be devoted to the documentation of 
twined, coiled, and plated basketry, as well as cordage and cordage 
byproducts. It will involve not only the delineation and recordation of 
technological attributes, but also the identification of plant and, in some 
cases, other organic raw materials used in the construction of these items. 
Students will engage with the material through a number of individual and 
group activities and projects. Prerequisites: ANTH 130, 237, Corequisite: 
ANTH 332. 1 credit. 

ANTH 336. HISTORY OF ANTHROPOLOGICAL THEORY 

This course is designed to address, through an examination of the history of 
anthropology, the theoretical developments, schools of thought, and ideas 
accounting for the nature of culture and cultural development. The specific 
contributions of the principal figures representative of each of the major 
schools of thought will also be identified and examined. While theories of 
culture are the focus and form the core of this course, the history and 
theoretical developments of archaeology will be simultaneously considered. 
Prerequisite: ANTH 130. 3 credits. 

ANTH 338. INTRODUCTION TO ARCHAEOLOGY THEORY 

This course is designed to introduce students to the development of ideas 
about why we do archaeology, the nature of our encounter with the 
material record of the past, how we make the past meaningful in the 
present, and the specific character of archaeology as a human science. This 
historical review considers both the contributions of specific 
scholars/schools of thought, and the relationship of their ideas to wider 
cultural trends which have shaped the social sciences and humanities. 
Prerequisite: ANTH 130. 3 credits. 

ANTH 340. PRINCIPLES OF EVOLUTION 

This course will include discussions of most aspects of the study of evolution 
including the history of evolutionary thought, Darwin’s contributions, 
Natural Selection, and micro-and macro-evolutionary principles. 
Prerequisite: ANTH 120. 3 credits. 

ANTH 342. FUNERARY ARCHAEOLOGY 

This course will have several aims. The first is to expose students to how 
archaeologists and anthropologists have conceptualized death and what 
effect this has had on the contribution of funerary material/activities to 
particular studies of social and economic development and change through 
the years. The second aim is to introduce students to the diversity of 
funerary practices in both the past and in the present, and more specifically, 
to explore the role of funerary rituals within the economic and social 
reproduction of particular communities. The third aim is to address how 
death has become politicized in the ongoing conflict between indigenous 
peoples and scientists over the ownership and control of human remains 
and their past. Prerequisite: ANTH 130. 3 credits. 

ANTH 344. ANTHROPOLOGY OF RITUAL 

This course is intended to introduce students first to the variety of 
anthropological theories which have attempted to make ritual practice 
intelligible to observers, and second, to the kinds of rituals in which humans 
participate during the course of their lives. Particular attention will be paid 
to how material culture and space are manipulated within ritual practice, in 

an ongoing discussion of how archaeologists explore rituals in the past. 
Prerequisites: ANTH 112, ANTH 130. 3 credits. 

ANTH 346. ANTHROPOLOGY OF GENDER 

This course has the main objective of introducing students to gender issues 
in anthropology and archaeology via lectures, practical exercises and a term 
project. Topics to be covered include gender bias in popular and academic 
archaeological/ anthropological discourse, gender and scientific practice, 
gender and archaeological theory, and “engendering” the past. A number of 
case studies will be considered. Prerequisites: ANTH 112, ANTH 130. 3 
credits. 

ANTH 347. ANTHROPOLOGICAL ETHICS 

This course explores the ethical, legal and practical dimensions of 
contemporary anthropology and its sub-disciplines through a consideration 
of topics such as anthropology as a profession, ethics and codes of conduct, 
national and international approaches to cultural/heritage management, 
the relationship between anthropology and diverse publics, and 
anthropological education. It is intended to expose students to the myriad 
issues that may arise during a career in anthropology (or the social sciences, 
generally) and prepare them to engage them productively. Emphasis is 
placed on helping students develop the skills necessary to formulate, discuss 
and defend their own set of anthropological values through critical analysis 
and study of case studies, ethical principles, and codes of conduct. 3 credits. 

ANTH 348. URBAN ANTHROPOLOGY 

This course provides an historical overview of the development of urban 
anthropology and an introduction to anthropological research on 
contemporary urban issues. Case studies of ancient, historic, and modern 
cities are examined. Several themes highlighted throughout the term 
include how the multiple roles of socioeconomic class, ethnicity, and gender 
interplay in an urban environment. Important topics such as migration, 
globalization, and urban development are addressed. Prerequisite: ANTH 

112. 3 credits. 
ANTH 349. ANTHROPOLOGY OF THE FAMILY 

This course is designed to survey cultural and historic variation in families. 
Kinship systems, as understood in anthropology, will be briefly discussed. 
Ethnographic case studies that bring attention to key concepts that create 
and maintain family forms, such as socioeconomic position, gender roles, 
and ethnic variability, will be read in class. Students will have the 
opportunity to examine topics such as sexuality, parenting, 
marriage/divorce, and our own values of what it means to be in a “family” in 
this class. Throughout the course a series of films on “the family” will be 
viewed, as well as lectures and group discussions of the readings. The course 
will end with a discussion of “family values” and family-relevant policies. 
Prerequisite: ANTH 112. 3 credits. 

ANTH 352. ETHNOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVES 

This course is designed to explore one anthropological subject in greater 
depth through lectures, readings, class discussions, and projects. The course 
provides an opportunity to critically examine historical shifts in 
anthropological analysis and thinking through the lens of one topical case 
study. These topics include, but are not limited to, case studies of specific 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 161 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


ethnic/cultural groups, globalization, power, identity, and class conflict. 
Prerequisite: ANTH/SOC 112. 3 credits. 

ANTH 357. BIOARCHAEOLOGY 

Students will learn how the analysis of human remains from archaeological 
contexts can inform on past demography, subsistence, diet, patterns of 
disease, biological distance, violence, warfare, migrations, physical activity, 
mortuary treatment, and various biological indicators of environmental 
conditions. Examples from numerous cultures and sites from around the 
world will be used to illustrate how the bioarchaeological approach helps us 
understand the lives and deaths of earlier peoples. Prerequesite Anth 112. 3 
credits. 

ANTH 360. ARCHAEOLOGICAL REPORT PREPARATION 

This course will introduce students to selected aspects of archaeological 
reporting, placing particular emphasis on practical applications. Topics to be 
covered will include the “anatomy” of an archaeological report, technical 
writing and editing, scholarly style, data presentation, desktop publishing, 
and illustration. 3 credits. 

ANTH 362. ARCHAEOLOGICAL MANAGEMENT 

The management and study of archaeological resources as mandated by 
laws and regulations forms the focus of this course. Specifically, the laws 
and government regulations that pertain to archaeology, the history of 
cultural resource legislation, ethics and the distinction between ethical and 
legal conduct, as well as the management of an archaeological project from 
the initial proposal to the final report will all be addressed. In its entirety, 
this course is designed to provide a sound understanding of professionalism 
in archaeology. Prerequisite: ANTH 130. 3 credits. 

ANTH 390. RESEARCH DESIGN 

Research Design focuses on the development of academic tools required to 
delineate and prepare an undergraduate research proposal. Students will 
select a general topic of research, narrow its scope, define a series of 
research objectives and tasks related to that topic, define appropriate 
methodological/interpretative avenues, and prepare a formal written 
research proposal. This proposal will serve as the basis for the student work 
in Anth 490, Senior Research. Prerequisites: ANTH 130, ANTH 236, ANTH 
237, ANTH 238, ANTH 239. 2 credits. 

ANTH 406. DIRECTED READINGS IN ANTH 

Independent study. 1-3 credits. 

ANTH 440. READINGS IN FORENSIC ANTH 

Students conduct literary research on a variety of special topics within 
Forensic Anthropology, ranging from the latest techniques in the analysis 
and interpretation of bones to role of the forensic anthropologist in the mass 
fatality incident. Students report their findings in weekly presentations and 
discussion sessions. Prerequisite: ANTH 242. 3 credits. 

ANTH 450. PATHOLOGIES HUMAN SKELETON 

This course will focus on the etiology and diagnosis of skeletal pathologies 
as found in prehistoric and forensic populations. Extensive hands-on 
training in radiographic techniques will supplement the lectures. 
Prerequisite: ANTH 242. 3 credits. 

ANTH 480. RESEARCH EXPERIENCE 

This course is designed to allow student to persue their own faculty-guided 
research in the terms prior to their Senior Thesis course or, on faculty 
research projects that involve students at all phases. 3 credits. 

ANTH 490. SENIOR THESIS 

Prerequisite: ANTH 390. 3 credits. 

ANTH 226A. ANTH/ARCH FLD TRNG PREHIST 

Indicates the Prehistoric field training program. 3-6 credits. 

ANTH 226B. ANTH/ARCH FIELD TRNG HIST 

Indicates the Historic field training program 
Participants will be exposed to the latest methodologies in archaeology, 
geoarchaeology, excavation techniques, field photography, mapping, 
laboratory procedures, artifact analysis, human osteology, computer 
applications, and many other techniques employed in contemporary 
archaeological excavations. Students will be taught the techniques of open-
site excavation and will be able to witness firsthand the ongoing 
interpretation of the natural and cultural history of archaeological sites. 
Prerequisites: ANTH 130, ANTH 224. 3-6 credits. 

ANTH 322A. ADVANCED FIELD TRAINING PREHISTORIC 

Indicates the Prehistoric field training program. 3-6 credits. 

ANTH 322B. ANTH/ARCH ADV FLD TRN HIST 

Indicates the Historic field training program. 3-6 credits. 

ANTH 422A. SUMMER FLD TRNG-PREHIST 

Indicates the prehistoric field training program. 3-6 credits. 

ANTH 422B. SUMMER FLD TRNG-HIST 

Indicates the prehistoric field training program. 3-6 credits. 

ANTH/FRSC 432. FORENSIC ANTHROPOLOGY SEMINAR I:RECOVERY 

This six-day international short-course is open to advanced undergraduate 
and graduate students and law enforcement and medicolegal professionals. 
The focus of seminar is on the recovery of human remains from surface, 
buried, fire, and mass fatality contexts. Topics to be covered include forensic 
entomology, forensic odontology, DNA analysis, skeletal analysis and 
forensic taphonomy. Prerequisite: ANTH 242. 1 credit. 

ANTH/FRSC 434. FORENSIC ANTHROPOLOGY SEMINAR II:LAB 
METHODS 

This six-day laboratory short-course focuses on the analysis and 
interpretation of human remains recovered in a forensic context. Topics to 
be addressed in the hands-on seminar include determination of identity 
(chronological age, gender, stature, ancestry, and non-metric traits), 
manner of death (trauma), and postmortem events (taphonomy). The 
course is open to advanced undergraduate and graduate students, law 
enforcement and medicolegal personnel. Prerequisite: ANTH 242. 1 credit. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 162 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


ANTH/FRSC 436. FORENSIC ANTHROPOLOGY SEMINAR III:ADVANCED 
RECOVERY 

This six-day short-course focuses on advanced field methods in the recovery 
of humans from surface, buried, fire, and mass fatality contexts. The course 
is scenario driven and requires the production of a final report. Open to 
individuals who have completed Anth 432/Frsc 432. Prerequisite: 
ANTH/FRSC 432 -. 1 credit. 

ANTH/GEOL 430. GEOARCHAEOLOGY 

Geoarchaeology (archaeogeology) examines in detail the interface which 
exists between the fields of geology and the anthropological sub discipline 
of archaeology. The purpose of this course is to acquaint the student not 
only with the history of the interrelationship between these academic 
specialties but also to document and illustrate the range of geological 
techniques which are useful to the contemporary archaeologist. More 
specifically, via lectures and laboratory work, this course will detail how 
geological methods may be employed in the location, excavation, and 
interpretation of archaeological sites and materials. Prerequisites: ANTH 
130, ANTH 224, GEOL 100, GEOL 245, GEOL 246, GEOL 247. Corequisite: 
ANTH/GEOL 431. 3 credits. 

ANTH/GEOL 431. GEOARCHAEOLOGY LAB 

This laboratory course exposes the student to contemporary analytical 
methods in Geoarchaeology. Specialization topics include geoarchaeological 
sampling procedures; sedimentological analysis, data processing and 
interpretation; compositional analysis; thin-section proportion; and 
paleoenvironmental reconstruction. Corequisite: ANTH/GEOL 430. 1 credit. 

ANTH/SOC 125. INTRO TO GENDER STUDIES 

This interdisciplinary course will cover the theoretical foundations and 
history of the gender discourse, and address topics central to the discipline 
of gender studies. The economic, political, ideological and social forces that 
shape the cultural construction of gender will be discussed and the 
consequences examined. The discussion will also include the intersection of 
gender, race, and socioeconomic class, biology and gender, and the 
gendered body. Through a variety of exercises/discussions and works of 
fiction, attention will be given to the connection between gender issues and 
life experiences. Students will also engage with course topics via lectures, 
readings, and films. 3 credits. 

ARAB 101. INTRO TO ARABIC I 

An introduction to the Arabic language, including development of the basic 
skills: reading, writing, listening and speaking. Learning activities aimed 
toward developing communicative proficiency and mastery of the writing 
system. 3 credits. 

ARAB 102. INTRO TO ARABIC II 

Further study of the skills introduced in Introduction to Arabic I, including a 
continued study of Arabic grammar and aural-oral practice designed to 
reinforce basic language skills. Prerequisite: ARAB 101. 3 credits. 

ARAB 203. INTERMEDIATE ARABIC I 

Students continue the development of the four language skills and 
incorporate a new emphasis on reading and writing Arabic. Prerequisite: 
ARAB 102. 3 credits. 

ARAB 204. INTERMEDIATE ARABIC II 

An intensive study of the more sophisticated grammatical patterns and 
idiomatic structures of Arabic designed to increase proficiency in reading, 
writing, and speaking the language. Prerequisite: ARAB 203. 3 credits. 

ART 100. DRAWING I 

Studio Experience designed to develop perception, skill and creativity. 
Includes demonstrations, practice, and projects in various techniques from 
gesture to final form renderings. Taken in the freshman year. Open to Art 
majors only. 3 credits. 

ART 101. PAINTING I/WATERCOLOR 

Studio experience designed to develop skill and creativity. Includes 
demonstrations, practice, and projects in various techniques from 
transparent watercolor to gouache. Prerequisites: ART 101, ART 125. 3 
credits. 

ART 102. CERAMICS I 

A beginning level 3-dimensional art course designed to present a 
foundation for the technical and aesthetic aspects of ceramic art. Lecture, 
demonstration, discussion and studio experience will be emphasized. 
Includes hand building, wheel throwing, glazing, and firing gas and electric 
kilns. 3 credits. 

ART 103. SCULPTURE 

A 3-dimensional art course primarily for the art major/minor. This class is 
designed to present fundamental methods of sculpture. Emphasis is on 
several in-depth studio experiences which demonstrate perception, 
technique, design, production and communication. Prerequisite: ART 126. 3 
credits. 

ART 104. PRINTMAKING I 

Studio experience designed to develop skill and creativity. Includes 
demonstrations, practice, and projects in various techniques including 
intaglio, planographic, relief and monotype. Prerequisites: Art 100, ART 125. 
3 credits. 

ART 105. PAINTING I/ACRYLIC 

Studio experience designed to develop skill and creativity. Includes 
demonstrations, practice and projects in various techniques from alla prima 
to hard edge. Prerequisites: Art 100, ART 125. 3 credits. 

ART 106. PHOTOGRAPHY I 

Studio experience in black and white photography. Includes taking 
photographs, developing film and darkroom printing techniques. Student 
must have S.LR. camera approved by instructor. 3 credits. 

ART 110. ART APPRECIATION 

A survey of the visual arts including painting, sculpture, and architecture. 
Includes the study of artists, design, significant art works, and art criticism. 
For Non-art Majors only. 3 credits. 

ART 122. ART HIST: ANCNT TO MEDIEVAL 

This course provides a survey of art and architecture from Prehistoric times 
to the Medieval Ages. Recommended for Upperclassmen. 3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 163 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


ART 123. ART HIST:RENAISS TO MODERN 

A survey of art and architecture from the Renaissance to the 20th Century. 
Recommended for Upperclassmen. 3 credits. 

ART 125. TWO-DIMENSIONAL DESIGN 

An introductory art foundations course. Primary emphasis is placed on 
developing the attitudes, perceptions, and skills which are necessary to 
pursue other art experiences. Includes exposure to and study of “basic” 
design– elements, principles, creative processes, tools, materials, 
techniques, and methods. Taken in the freshman year. Prerequisite: Art 100. 
3 credits. 

ART 126. 3-DIMENSIONAL DESIGN 

An introductory 3-dimensional design course. Emphasis is on elements and 
principles of design. The components of production, art history, aesthetics, 
and criticism will be introduced relevant to 3-dimensional art. Taken in 
freshman year. Prerequisite: ART 100. 3 credits. 

ART 128. BASIC COMPUTER DESIGN 

This foundational course introduces students to basic design concepts, 
computer literacy and software competency. Through various exercises, 
students will experience four of the basic types of publishing tools used by 
designers – Photoshop, Illustrator, In Design and Dreamweaver. 3 credits. 

ART 200. DRAWING II 

Continued experience of creative skills developed in Drawing I. 
Prerequisites: Art 100. 3 credits. 

ART 201. PAINTING II 

Continued experience of creative skills developed in Painting I. Prerequisite: 
ART 101. 3 credits. 

ART 202. CERAMICS II 

Continued experience of creative skills developed in Ceramics I. Prerequisite: 
ART 102. 3 credits. 

ART 204. PRINTMAKING II 

Continued experience of creative skills developed in Printmaking I. 
Prerequisite: ART 104. 3 credits. 

ART 205. PAINTING II/OIL 

Upper level studio course designed to explore oil painting concepts and to 
develop creative skills. Direct painting to glazing methods. Prerequisites: 
ART 100, ART 125. 3 credits. 

ART 206. INTERMEDIATE PHOTOGRAPHY 

Continued experience of creative skills developed in Photography I. Student 
must have a digital S.L.R. camera approved by the instructor. Prerequisite: 
ART 106. 3 credits. 

ART 215. FIGURE DRAWING 

Upper level studio course focusing on the human figure. Includes 
demonstrations, practice and projects in various techniques and methods 
from gesture to sustained studies to anatomical renderings. Prerequisites: 
ART 100. 3 credits. 

ART 216. CERAMIC SCULPTURE 

A second level ceramic course. Includes the study of clay bodies and 
methods of ceramics for sculpture. Prerequisite: ART 102. 3 credits. 

ART 217. WHEEL THROWN CERAMICS 

A second level ceramic course. Includes the study of wheel throwing 
methods, functional forms, decoration, and firing methods. Prerequisite: 
ART 102. 3 credits. 

ART 220. TYPOGRAPHIC FOUNDATIONS 

This entry-level course introduces students to basic design theories and skills 
for creating professional typographic works. Students create a variety of 
exercises to better understand design. Theoretical exercises, typography 
projects and readings introduce students to lifelong design issues and tasks. 
Adobe InDesign, Illustrator, Photoshop, and After Effects are utilized in this 
course. Prerequisites: ART 100, ART 125, ART 128 or permission. 3 credits. 

ART 221. DIGITAL IMAGERY 

Photoshop image creation and manipulation is explored. Emphasis, in this 
term, is proper file creation, learning and utilizing specialized tools, applying 
proper design theories to computer generated art, and tutorials for special 
effects. Projects focus on various kinds of photo collage and retouching as it 
relates to a variety of clients. Prerequisite: ART 128. 3 credits. 

ART 223. HISTORY OF MODERN ART 

A survey of art from the early 20th century to the present. Prerequisites: ART 
122 or ART 123. 3 credits. 

ART 224. HISTORY OF PHOTOGRAPHY 

A survey of the medium of photography from its invention in 1839 to the 
present. Includes the development of movies and video. 3 credits. 

ART 225. COMPUTER ILLUSTRATION TECH 

This class expands the student’s command of Adobe Illustrator by exploring 
a combination of vector skills, traditional media, and 3-D techniques used to 
create spot and editorial illustration. Students will develop a character in 
both illustrator and CAD format. Successfully rendered characters will be 
output on a 3-D printer. Assignments may include: Infographics, card and 
gift design, label reconstruction, and playing card development. 
Prerequisite: ART 128. 3 credits. 

ART 230. GRAPHIC DESIGN HISTORY 

Beginning with the Industrial Revolution, this course will chart the 
development of what we contemporarily refer to as Graphic Design and 
Advertising. Students will survey the designers, works, technologies, and 
philosophies of the major design movements and create work exploring 
these areas. Emphasis will be placed on the connection of design to art and 
popular culture, as well as the cyclical nature of design. Students create 
various pieces reflecting the work of the movements being studied. 
Prerequisite: ART 128. 3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 164 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


ART 231. DIGITAL VIDEO EDITING 

This course introduces a student to GoPro® to generate content, progressing 
them to editing video clips and creating digital videos. Students will develop 
video editing experience using Final Cut Pro. Having experience using Adobe 
programs or other editing tools will be to a student’s advantage but is not 
required. 3 credits. 

ART 240. FOUNDATIONS ART EDUCATION 

A course to investigate theories of art, education, and visual culture that 
shape one’s thinking about the purpose, value, and practice of art education 
in schools, museums, and community settings. 3 credits. 

ART 250. SPECIAL TOPICS 

Art Special Topics focuses on subjects and techniques in the contemporary 
art world. These courses will vary from term to term and offer students new 
challenges in art-making not available within the traditional coursework. 3 
credits. 

ART 300. DRAWING III 

Continued experience of creative skills developed in Drawing I. 
Prerequisites: ART 200. 3 credits. 

ART 301. PAINTING III 

Continued experience of creative skills developed in Painting I. 
Prerequisites: ART 201. 3 credits. 

ART 302. CERAMICS III 

Continued experience of creative skills developed in Ceramics I. Prerequisite: 
ART 202. 3 credits. 

ART 304. PRINTMAKING III 

Continued experience of creative skills developed in Printmaking I. 
Prerequisite: ART 204. 3 credits. 

ART 305. DIGITAL PHOTOGRAPHY 

A second level studio course which includes contemporary theory, 
photographic design issues, image manipulation, and image output. 
Prerequisite: ART 106. 3 credits. 

ART 306. COLOR PHOTOGRAPHY 

A studio experience in taking color photographs and digital printing. 
Student must have a digital S.L.R. camera approved by the instructor. 
Prerequisite: ART 106. 3 credits. 

ART 311. ART EDUCATION/SECONDARY 

The emerging art educator engages the study and creation of contemporary 
art forms as curricular and pedagogical approaches to investigate with 
middle level and high school students. Art Education Majors or by 
permission. 3 credits. 

ART 312. ART EDUCATION/ELEMENTARY 

Preparation of curricula, pedagogical, and assessment strategies for early 
childhood and elementary school art education programs. Art Education 
Majors or by permission. 3 credits. 

ART 320. TYPE & PUBLICATION DESIGN 

Multi-page layout is the emphasis in this class. Students learn how to 
handle text, integrate images into layout, and develop an upper level sense 
of typography. Projects may include: poster design, cook book layout, 
newsletter design, interactive IPad application, and book jacket design. 
Students learn how to use Adobe InDesign in concert with Photoshop, 
Illustrator, Acrobat, and After Effects. Prerequisite: ART 220 or permission. 3 
credits. 

ART 321. INTRO TO WEBSITE DESIGN 

This class introduces students to design for the World Wide Web. Students 
add Dreamweaver to their software arsenal. An emphasis on a design 
ideology using HTML5 and CSS3 to solve visual problems is used in order to 
create sites based on industry standard practices. Current issues specific to 
the World Wide Web are introduced. Sites are mapped. A selection of pages 
are created and uploaded to remote servers. Marketing components 
including HTML email campaigns and social media publishing are covered. 
Prerequisite: ART 220. 3 credits. 

ART 322. CORP IDENTITY & BRANDING 

The most intensive of all the design courses, students in this course create 
and design for two companies -an imaginary company of their own 
choosing and a local small business through the Small Business 
Development Center. Logotypes are designed. Brand sensing and 
archetyping are applied. Business systems, advertisments, packaging, and 
Graphic Design Standards Manuals are developed. Prerequisite: ART 320. 3 
credits. 

ART 323. PORTFOLIO DEVELOPMENT 

The culmination of a student’s graphic design efforts, this course seeks to 
refine a student’s style and to display it in the most advantageous form. 
Students create a professional resume, traditional and online portfolios; 
Linkedin and Behance Profiles. Students commit to a geographical area and 
discipline focus. With this decision made, research is performed, cover 
letters generated, resumes refined, and the job hunt begins. Prerequisites: 5 
approved graphic design courses. 3 credits. 

ART 325. INTERMED WEBSITE DESIGN 

This course builds upon the HTML5 / CSS3 skills from previous courses. 
Students add to their base of skills to take the presentation of the web page 
to the world of responsive frameworks. Using industry accepted responsive 
frameworks web pages will properly display on mobile, tablet and desktop 
devices. CSS skills are also honed to give better color, type, layout and 
interactivity to the produced websites. Prerequisite: ART 321. 3 credits. 

ART 326. ADVANCED WEBSITE DESIGN 

This 2 part course will take students to advanced levels of web 
development. In part 1, students will gain experience with current CMS 
(content management systems). The CMS experience will take the designer 
through server side software installation, configuration, user control, theme 
and plug-in application, page and post creation, theme development and, 
finally, the application and testing of an e-commerce module with a 
working payment gateway. Part 2 will focus on user experience. The design 
process will focus on a person's total experience using a website. UX design 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 165 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


principals will be applied through the use of modern software used to create 
working prototypes of complex sites. Prerequisite: ART 325. 3 credits. 

ART 335. AESTHETICS & CRITICISM 

Course designed to acquaint students with the knowledge, skills, 
experiences, and attitudes to better understand the philosophical basis, 
nature, functions, and criticism of art works. 3 credits. 

ART 400. INDIVIDUAL STUDIO I 

Students may elect additional in-depth studio experience in specific areas 
under the supervision of appropriate instructors. Limited to upper level 
students. Permission of the instructor is required prior to beginning of the 
term. Normally taken after completion of 9 credits within an area. 3 credits. 

ART 401. INDIVIDUAL STUDIO II 

Students may elect additional in-depth studio experience in specific areas 
under the supervision of appropriate instructors. Limited to upper level 
students. Permission of the instructor is required prior to beginning of the 
term. Normally taken after completion of 9 credits within an area. 3 credits. 

ART 402. INDIVIDUAL STUDIO III 

Students may elect additional in-depth studio experience in specific areas 
under the supervision of appropriate instructors. Limited to upper level 
students. Permission of the instructor is required prior to beginning of the 
term. Normally taken after completion of 9 credits within an area. 3 credits. 

ART 403. INDEP STUDY/ART I 

An offering primarily for the senior art major who desires to pursue 
independent research and development in such areas as Art Education, Art 
History, Art Studio, or Art Therapy. Each student is required to present 
written evidence in support of this project to the Department for approval at 
least six weeks in advance. 3credits. 3 credits. 

ART 404. INDEP STUDY/ART II 

An offering primarily for the senior art major who desires to pursue 
independent research and development in such areas as Art Education, Art 
History, Art Studio, or Art Therapy. Each student is required to present 
written evidence in support of this project to the Department Chair for 
approval at least six weeks in advance. 3 credits. 

ART 405. INDEP STUDY/ART III 

An offering primarily for the senior art major who desires to pursue 
independent research and development in such areas as Art Education, Art 
History, Art Studio, or Art Therapy. Each student is required to present 
written evidence in support of this project to the Department Chair for 
approval at least six weeks in advance. 3 credits. 

ART 410. SR ART THESIS INDIVIDUALIZED STUDIO 

Senior art majors work with a studio faculty member as their mentor. The 
student will develop, design, produce and exhibit an original art thesis. 
Permission of the instructor required. Prerequisite: 6 ART/ARTH courses. 3 
credits. 

ART 452. SENIOR ART THESIS SEMINAR 

Readings, research, presentations and discussion of contemporary art 
provide context for idea generation and execution of a variety of focused art 
projects as practice to thesis work. This course in conjunction with Senior Art 
Thesis Individualized Studio will lead to the selection, development, design, 
production, and presentation of an original art thesis. Senior art majors. 3 
credits. 

ART 475. ART INTERNSHIP 

On-the-job training in graphic design, commercial/advertising fields, Art 
Therapy, and Art Management. Permission of Major Director required prior 
to beginning of term. Upper level students only. 3 credits. 

ART 476. ART INTERNSHIP 

On-the-job training in graphic design, commercial/advertising fields, Art 
Therapy, and Art Management. Permission of Major Director required prior 
to beginning of term. Upper level students only. 6 credits. 

ART 477. ART INTERNSHIP 

On-the-job training in graphic design, commercial/advertising fields, Art 
Therapy, and Art Management. Permission of Major Director required prior 
to beginning of term. Upper level students only. 9 credits. 

ARTH 125. ART THERAPY I/INTRO 

This is a beginning level course for art therapy majors, minors and non-
majors designed to provide a foundation for the study of art therapy by 
presenting the therapeutic qualities of this profession through art therapy’s 
origins, history, occupational applications and therapeutic approaches. 
Students will create works that exemplify an interaction of creativity, 
healing potential, and cognitive awareness. Emphasis will be placed on 
comprehension of the above aspects through the student’s written and 
verbal explanations as well as testing. 3 credits. 

ARTH 225. ART THERAPY II/MAT & METH 

This course is designed to explore artistic methods and materials that lend 
themselves to psychological reflection, insight and use in therapeutic 
settings. Through art therapy experientials, discussion, historical reference, 
service learning opportunities, and assessment of acquired knowledge, the 
art therapy student will realize the factors that can encourage therapeutic 
art making. Prerequisite: ARTH 125. 3 credits. 

ARTH 325. ART THERAPY III PRACTICES 

In this course, various community and agency settings, and therapeutic art 
making approaches are studied. These studies, along with previously 
attained information and service learning experiences prepare students for 
an art therapy internship. Prerequisites: ARTH 125, ARTH 225. 3 credits. 

ARTH 425. ART THERAPY V SEMINAR 

This is the last class in the sequence of art therapy courses at Mercyhurst 
University. Through course work, art therapy majors have accumulated a 
basic knowledge of various aspects of art therapy including: history, theory, 
and applications for different populations in a wide range of contexts. 
Students have also completed a 200-hour internship in which they 
facilitated art activities in a therapeutic setting. During the seminar, 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 166 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


students synthesize art therapy concepts and internship experiences 
through creating a presentation, research studies, and self-reflection. Career 
paths and masters level study are considered. Prerequisites: ARTH 325, ARTH 

475. 3 credits. 
ARTH 475. ART THERAPY IV INTERN 

A field course providing a supervised practicum experience in the application 
of the theories, models, methods, and techniques of creative art expression 
in community agencies and therapeutic settings. 3 credits. 

ASIA 125. ASIAN CULTURES 

Studies the cultures of India, China, Korea and Japan through an 
examination of common roots and development in geography, history, arts 
and religion. 3 credits. 

ASIA 135. TOPICS IN ASIAN STUDIES 

The content of this course, determined by the instructor, will focus on some 
literary or cultural subject relating to an Asian nation or nations. 
Coursework will further student understanding of a people or peoples of 
Asia. Conducted in English. 3 credits. 

ATR 162. INTRO TO ATHLETIC TRAINING 

The purpose of this course is to introduce first year Athletic Training students 
to the allied health profession, injury/illness pathophysiology and 
evaluation. History of their desired profession, necessary educational 
background and job opportunities will be discussed in order to promote 
professional development. Students will gain knowledge of the tissue injury 
cycle at the cellular level, which allows the students to have a complete 
understanding of the healing process. The evaluation sequence, along with 
proper documentation, will be introduced and students are encouraged to 
apply this knowledge. Throughout the course students will be using and 
focusing on their critical thinking skills in relation to their profession. 
Students are required to complete 25 hours of clinical observation. 
Prerequisites: BIO 130, BIO 131. 3 credits. 

ATR 163. Freshman Clinical Proficiency Lab 

Clinical teaching and testing of hands-on proficiency skills that are required 
for all Athletic Training students who are applying to the review board for 
acceptance into the major. Taping and wrapping of specific body parts will 
be emphasized. Eleven through 20 of the 20 clinical proficiency skills 
required for the review board will be presented. Students are required to 
complete 40 hours of observation in the athletic training room on campus as 
with designated ACI/CI as part of the pre-clinical experience. Athletic 
Training students only. AT majors only 1 credits. 

ATR 200. Clinical Education I Lab 

The first of four clinical education courses designed in conjunction with the 
clinical education sequence emphasizing presentation, practice, and final 
outcome testing of designated clinical proficiencies in relationship to dayto-
day athletic training. Clinical experience performance and daily 
completion of responsibilities will also be assessed. Students are required to 
obtain clinical experience in accordance with the clinical education 
sequence. AT students only. Must be taken in chronological order. 
Prerequisite AT majors only. 1 credit. 

ATR 201. Clinical Education II Lab 

The second of four clinical education courses designed in conjunction with 
the clinical education sequence emphasizing presentation, practice, and 
final outcome testing of designated clinical proficiencies in relationship to 
day-to-day athletic training. Clinical experience performance and daily 
completion of responsibilities will also be assessed. Students are required to 
obtain clinical experience in accordance with the clinical education 
sequence. AT students only. Must be taken in chronological order. 
Prerequisite AT majors only 1 credit. 

ATR 256. Exercise, Health and Conditioning for Athletes 

A course covering specific exercise techniques to improve the conditioning of 
various types of athletes. The course will include both discussion and 
psychomotor experience. Topics that will be covered include: aerobic, 
anaerobic, isotonic, isokinetic, plyometric, flexibility, proprioception and 
neuromuscular control exercise methods. Clinical proficiency testing may 
also be incorporated to specific topics. A final individual project will be 
required encompassing the course content to create a full conditioning 
program for a specified athlete. Prerequisites: AT majors only. 2 credits. 

ATR 257. Medical Education Lab I 

A lecture series and psychomotor testing with topics regarding illness, 
diseases, and environmental issues associated with allied health 
professionals. AT majors only. 1 credit. 

ATR 258. Medical Education Lab II 

A lecture series of medical topics presented by the department team 
physician or designated medical professional on relevant topics in the sports 
medicine field. AT majors only. 1 credit. 

ATR 267. Therapeutic Modalities 

This evidence-based course consists of classroom and clinical practice 
stressing the proper use of therapeutic modalities in aiding injuries and 
illnesses common to the physically active population. Emphasis is given to 
superficial agents, electrical stimulation, therapeutic ultrasound, LLLT and 
light therapy, mechanical modalities and manual muscle therapy. 
Prerequisites: AT majors only. Corequisite: ATR 268. 3 Credits. 

ATR 268. Therapeutic Modalities Lab 

This evidence based course consists of clinical application of therapeutic 
modalities in aiding injuries and illnesses common to the physically active 
population. Emphasis is given to superficial agents, electrical stimulation, 
therapeutic ultrasound, LLLT and light therapy, mechanical modalities and 
manual muscle therapy. Corequisite: ATR 267. 1 credit. 

ATR 300. Clinical Education III Lab 

The third of four athletic training clinical rotation experiences emphasizing 
presentation, practice, and final outcome testing of designated clinical 
proficiencies in relationship to day-to-day athletic training. Clinical rotation 
performance and daily completion of responsibilities will also be assessed. 
These proficiencies and competencies can be obtained from the athletic 
training curriculum director. Prerequisite: Prerequisites: AT majors only. 1 
credit. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 167 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


ATR 301. Clinical Education IV Lab 

The final Athletic Training clinical rotation experiences emphasizing 
presentation, practice, and final outcome testing of designated clinical 
proficiencies in relationship to day-to-day athletic training. Clinical rotation 
performance and daily completion of responsibilities will also be assessed. 
These proficiencies and competencies can be obtained from the athletic 
training curriculum director. Prerequisite: Prerequisites: AT majors only 1 
credits. 

ATR 362. Therapeutic Exercise 

Evidence-based lecture and clinical instruction stressing the injury 
rehabilitation programs for specific injuries and post-surgical care. Topics 
include goals of therapeutic exercise, range of motion techniques, stretching 
techniques, resistance exercises and peripheral joint mobilization. 
Prerequisite: Prerequisites: AT majors only. Corequisite: ATR 363. 3 credits. 

ATR 363. Therapeutic Exercise Lab 

Clinical formation and application of the techniques and theories of injury 
rehabilitation programs. Corequisite: ATR 362. 1 credit. 

ATR 364. Athletic Training Administration and Management 

Study of the administrative and management procedures in athletic training 
environments; techniques for developing effectiveness as an administrator. 
Practical experience in solving hypothetical administrative problems 
provided. Topics include professional ethics, staff hiring, facility design, 
insurance protocol, budget design, medical practice act and employment 
opportunities including resume writing and mock interviews. Athletic 
Training majors only. 3 credits. 

ATR 404. Athletic Training Capstone Experience 

The purpose of this capstone athletic training course is to allow senior 
athletic training students to integrate their clinical and didactic knowledge 
in a preprofessional 
setting. Opportunity to prepare for the BOC 
certification examination and to prepare for their future careers in athletic 
training or placement in an advanced degree program will be explored. 
Special emphasis will be placed on study habits, BOC exam content and 
format, graduate school application processes, resume building, 
interviewing techniques and other skills pertinent to the senior level athletic 
training student. During this time students are required to complete an 
average of 100 hours at a mutually agreed upon clinical setting. . The 
capstone experience is specifically designed to allow students to choose an 
area or specialty that suits their interests. Students will also develop a 
semester-long assigned patient case study with an oral presentation 
requirement. Prerequisite: Prerequisites: AT majors only ~A HELM Course~ 
3 credits. 

ATR 461. Special Issues in Athletic Training 

The main focus of this course is discussion and case studies of special 
populations in the physically active. Populations will include but are not 
limited to: pediatrics, geriatrics, pregnant women, diabetics, asthmatics, 
and disabled. Discussion will be in the areas of injury and illness 
management, activity restrictions, and NATA position statements related to 
special populations. There is also a clinical component to this course in 
which the student is to complete a required number of hours with an 

assigned clinical experience. Prerequisites: AT majors only. ~A HELM 
Course~ 3 credits. 

ATR 480. Research Methods 

The purpose of this course is to develop and refine student’s clinical 
evidence-based practice skills. The focus of the course will explore how 
epidemiology shapes health care practices for patients. Exploration will 
include the acquired knowledge of the steps on how to find reliable 
information and the ability to critically process the link between data 
collection and professional practice. AT Majors only. 3 credits. 

BADM 250. ENTREPRENEURSHIP 

This course is designed for those students interested in learning how to start 
their own business, buy an existing business or function as an entrepreneur 
in a large company. Topics include developing and evaluating business 
concepts, preparing a business plan, trademarks and patents and securing 
financing. Prerequisites: ACCT 101, MGMT 120, MKTG 162. 3 credits. 

BADM 275. PRIN OF OPERATIONS MGMT 

This course is an introduction to the field of operations management. The 
student will be exposed to fundamental principles including demand 
forecasting, system design, supply chain management, project 
management, and quality. This course will demonstrate the importance of 
these topics in both manufacturing and service concerns alike. 3 credits. 

BADM 285. GLOBL OP & SUPPLY CHAIN MGMT 

Supply chain management is the management of a network of 
interconnected businesses involved in the ultimate provision of product and 
service packages required by end customers. Businesses throughout the 
world are beginning to recognize that in an increasingly challenging and 
complex global marketplace, there is an urgent need for decision-making 
frameworks. This course will provide such a framework by integrating 
operations and supply chain concepts to address the critical issue of 
managing flows of products, services and information. The course will also 
emphasize the importance of managing information in the global 
environment and the effective use of supply chain information technologies 
such as e-commerce and e-business and their integration through an 
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system. Prerequisite: BADM 275. 3 
credits. 

BADM 310. BUSINESS LAW I 

A survey of the legal principles found in transactions typified in today’s 
business world. Emphasis is placed on the case study method along with 
real-world examples. Topics covered include: alternative dispute resolution, 
structure of the court system, contracts, sales, property law, insurance law, 
and corporate ethics. 3 credits. 

BADM 325. BUSINESS LAW II 

The second course of study in the legal series. Strongly recommended for all 
business majors; required in some states for the CPA exam. The case study 
method and real-world examples are used to cover the following topics: 
agency and employment law, types of business entities, negotiable 
instruments, bankruptcy, securities law, antitrust laws and environmental 
regulation. Not offered every year. 3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 168 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


BADM 350. BUSINESS ETHICS 

This course addresses the complex agenda of issues such as the role of 
business in society, the nature of corporate responsibility, the ethical 
environment of business, the relationship between government and 
business, and the impact of business on the natural environment. Attention 
will be given to the impact of these issues on a business and its stakeholders 
(managers, consumers, employees, and community members). Case studies 
will be used to highlight each area of concern. 3 credits. 

BADM 405. BUSINESS POLICY & STRATEGY 

A capstone course which emphasizes business problem solving based on 
accounting, finance, management and marketing principles. Students will 
complete and present a case study project. Prerequisites: Senior Standing. 
3 credits. 

BADM 450. INDEP STUDY IN BUSINESS 

This course is designed to permit a student to study individually in a 
specialized field under the direction of a faculty member. The research topic 
must be appropriate to the student’s background, and written approval 
must be received from the dean of the Walker College of Business. 1, 2, or 3 
credits. 1-3 credits. 

BADM 475. BUSINESS INTERNSHIP 

An individual work-study experience in an approved business organization. 
Placement of a qualified student in a business setting which involves the 
area of interest, provides training and on-the-job learning, and which will 
prepare the student for a future career in business. Junior standing, 2.75 
GPA in required business courses, written permission of the associate dean. 
3 credits. 

BIO 110. PLANT SCIENCE 

An introduction to the study of plants including their biology and ecology. 
Topics include basic structure and function of cells and organs, plant growth 
and development, and systematics of higher plants. Emphasis is on the 
impact of humans on plant life and plant community structure. Does not 
fulfill Biology major requirements. Corequisite: BIO 111. 3 credits. 

BIO 111. PLANT SCIENCE LAB 

Laboratory and field studies of plant communities and the effects of humans 
on plant diversity within controlled community structures. Identification of 
higher plants is stressed as well as identifications of human, ecological 
and/or pathogen caused distress in plant systems. Corequisite: BIO 110. 1 
credit. 

BIO 120. HUMAN BIOLOGY 

This course provides students with a basic understanding of how the human 
body works, including introductory cell biology, biochemistry, anatomy and 
physiology. Students will use this basic knowledge to help them understand 
current scientific research on the human body and human health. Does not 
fulfill Biology major requirements. Corequisite: BIO 121. 3 credits. 

BIO 121. HUMAN BIOLOGY LAB 

A laboratory course designed to demonstrate through models, microscopic 
work and dissection the information presented in BIO 120. Students will 

also conduct simple experiments to model the scientific method. 
Corequisite: BIO 120. 1 credit. 

BIO 125. MEDICAL TERMINOLOGY 

This course focuses on building vocabulary commonly encountered in the 
health field. In addition to an extensive review of word elements, including 
word roots, combining forms, suffixes, and prefixes, the course will define 
major organ systems from the cellular to the organismal level. Finally, 
medical conditions will be explored in detail. 3 credits. 

BIO 130. FUNCTIONAL HUMAN BIOLOGY 

This course provides a general understanding of human biology with an 
emphasis on biophysical aspects of movement. Specific topics include basic 
biochemistry, cell biology, histology, and visceral systems of the body. 
Designed for Sports Medicine and Dance majors. Does not fulfill Biology 
major requirements. Corequisite: BIO 131. 3 credits. 

BIO 131. FUNCTIONAL HUMAN BIO LAB 

Laboratory exercises in biochemistry, cell biology and human tissues and 
organ systems, with special emphasis on musculoskeletal, articular and 
neuromuscular systems, evaluated from an athletic minded perspective. 
Corequisite: BIO 130. 1 credit. 

BIO 142. Cellular & Molecular Biology 

Introduction to the biology of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, including the 
structure and function of membranes and organelles, especially 
mitochondria and chloroplasts. Also included are studies of the molecular 
structure and function of DNA, with emphasis on the organization of the 
eukaryotic genome, transcription and translation. Corequisite: BIO 143. 3 
credits. 

BIO 143. Cellular & Molecular Biology Lab 

Introduction to the physiological and molecular techniques and 
methodologies for studying cells, organelles and macromolecules in relation 
to cellular activities and maintenance of life. Corequisite: BIO 142. 1 credit. 

BIO 146. ECOL&EVOL BIO OF ORGANISMS 

Introduction to the ecology and evolutionary biology of organisms, 
including population growth, species interactions, ecosystem cycles, 
mechanisms of evolution, speciation, the diversity of life on Earth, and an 
introduction to population and Mendelian genetics. Corequisite: BIO 147. 3 
credits. 

BIO 147. ECOL&EVOL BIO OF ORG LAB 

A laboratory course that elucidates concepts taught in Bio 146 from a largely 
experimental perspective. Corequisite: BIO 146. 1 credit. 

BIO 148. ORGANISMAL BIOLOGY 

An introduction to the taxonomy, anatomy and physiology of the 
multicellular organisms, emphasizing the concepts of homeostasis and 
rheostasis. Corequisite: BIO 149. 3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 169 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


BIO 149. ORGANISMAL BIOLOGY LAB 

A laboratory course that elucidates concepts taught in Bio 148. Dissection of 
organisms and experimental techniques will be emphasized. Corequisite: 
BIO 148. 1 credit. 

BIO 150. BIOLOGY OF BEHAVIOR 

A study of animal behavior from a physiological, evolutionary, and 
ecological perspective. Student presentations and the discussion of 
behavioral principles will be emphasized in class. Corequisite: BIO 151. 3 
credits. 

BIO 151. BIOLOGY OF BEHAVIOR LAB 

Student originated experimentation on a variety of behavioral topics 
utilizing proper scientific method. Corequisite: BIO 150. 1 credit. 

BIO 180. MICROORGANISMS 

An introductory study of microorganisms directly impacting human health 
and society, including viruses, bacteria, fungi and protists. Topics include 
taxonomy and identification of medically important taxa, human defense 
mechanisms, symbioses, course of infections, epidemiology and food 
sciences. Does not fulfill Biology major requirements. Corequisite: BIO 181. 3 
credits. 

BIO 181. MICROORGANISMS LAB 

Introduction to the methods of identification and culturing of medically 
important microorganisms and viruses. Emphasis on general and specialized 
culturing methods, staining techniques and growth experiments. 
Corequisite: BIO 180. 1 credit. 

BIO 198. TROPICAL MARINE BIO 

Exploration of tropical marine habitats including coral reefs, rocky shores, 
turtle grass and mangrove swamps. Ecological and behavioral adaptations, 
trophic structure, and species composition are also studied. Snorkeling at 
offshore reefs is expected, and SCUBA diving is available. The course meets 
weekly during the winter term in preparation for a 10-day field trip to a 
tropical field station. Corequisite: BIO 199. 3 credits. 

BIO 199. TROPICAL MARINE BIO LAB 

The identification of marine organisms and an independent research project 
in marine biology. Corequisite: BIO 198. 1 credit. 

BIO 200. MICROBIOLOGY 

The study of bacteria and other microbes with emphasis on their structure 
and function, ecology, biochemistry and research methodologies. The course 
reviews the biology of microbes and their use as biological and medical 
research tools. Prerequisites: BIO 142. Corequisite:. 3 credits. 

BIO 201. MICROBIOLOGY LAB 

An examination of microbes in the biosphere. Microbial collection, culturing, 
product analysis, aseptic techniques and microscopy are emphasized. 
Corequisite: BIO 200. 1 credit. 

BIO 202. HEALTH CAREER SEMINAR 

A multifaceted course designed to provide information and prepare students 
interested in becoming a health professional. In addition to guest speakers 
from a variety of health disciplines, the content of the course will include an 
extensive review of medical terminology, standardized test preparation, 
personal statement review and interviewing skills. 3 credits. 

BIO 208. CANCER: BIOLOGY & BEYOND 

This course will introduce students to the origins, diagnosis, treatment and 
prevention of cancer; creating informed citizens, and future health care 
providers and scientists. This course also contains a cancer-centered service-
learning project to connect the science of cancer biology to the people 
cancer effects. Prerequisites: BIO 142. 3 credits. 

BIO 210. BOTANY 

An introduction to the major divisions of nonvascular and vascular plants. 
Includes basic studies of plant taxonomy, anatomy, physiology, growth, 
evolution and ecology. Prerequisites: BIO 146. Corequisite: BIO 210. 3 
credits. 

BIO 211. BOTANY LAB 

Field and laboratory experiences in plant morphology, identification, 
ecology, and experiments in plant physiology. Corequisite: BIO 210. 1 credit. 

BIO 216. PLANTS AND PEOPLE 

People depend on plants for food, clothing, shelter, medicines and a host of 
other daily needs. This course examines the varied and complex 
interrelationships between plants and people. Major topics include 
domestication processes, the Green Revolution, intentional and 
unintentional modification of plant communities, and an examination of 
those plants that provide drugs, food, beverages and fibers necessary to 
daily life. 3 credits. 

BIO 230. INVERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY 

A comparative study of the major invertebrate phyla, their anatomy, 
physiology, behavior and evolution. Major emphasis on invertebrate 
animals. Prerequisites: BIO 146. 3 credits. 

BIO 234. ORNITHOLOGY 

Ornithology is the scientific study of birds with emphasis on field studies of 
adaptive morphology, behavior and ecology. Lectures and seminar sessions 
during the Winter term will address topics such as sexual selection in birds, 
sensory physiology of migration and navigation, and avian medicine. Bird 
identification, community ecology, and conservation issues related to 
climate change will be addressed during the field component of class. 
Prerequisites: BIO 146, or BIO 148. 3 credits. 

BIO 240. HUMAN ANATOMY & PHYS I 

A study of the structural and functional relationships of cells, tissues, organs, 
and systems of the human body. Emphasis is placed on the skeletal, 
muscular, and nervous systems. Does not fulfill Biology major requirements. 
Prerequisites: BIO 120. Corequisite: BIO 241. 3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 170 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


BIO 241. HUMAN ANATOMY & PHYS I LAB 

A detailed study of the human anatomy of the organ systems discussed in 
Bio 240. corequistite: BIO 240. 1 credit. 1 credit. 

BIO 244. HISTOLOGY 

The study of cellular and molecular aspects of human tissue structures and 
their relationship to function and physiology. Prerequisites: BIO 240, BIO 
320,OR BIO 334. Corequisite: BIO 245. 3 credits. 

BIO 245. HISTOLOGY LAB 

A survey of tissues prepared for light and electron microscopic examination. 
Students will also gain an introduction to basic immunofluorescence 
techniques. Corequisite: BIO 244. 1 credit. 

BIO 250. HUMAN ANATOMY&PHYS II 

A continuation of Biology 240, including the circulatory, respiratory, renal, 
digestive, endocrine, and reproductive systems of the human body. Does not 
fulfill Biology major requirements. Prerequisites: BIO 240. Corequisite: BIO 

251. 3 credits. 
BIO 251. HUMAN ANAT & PHYS II LAB 

Physiological experimentation designed to illustrate topics covered in Bio 

250. A specialized research project is included. Corequisite: BIO 250. 1 credit. 
BIO 272. FOREST ECOLOGY 

The study of how trees and other organisms of the forest interact, how 
forests are managed, and their value to human society and Earth. Topics 
include forest food webs, forest structure, nutrient cycling, forests of the 
world, logging and resource extraction, disturbance and fire ecology, tree 
physiology and anatomy, and how climate shapes forest structure, 
composition, and tree distributions. Prerequisites: BIO 146. Corequisite: BIO 

273. 3 credits. 
BIO 273. FOREST ECOLOGY LAB 

Field and laboratory exercises designed to accompany topics covered in BIO 

272. Most lab periods will be outside and may include a weekend field trip 
to a National Forest. Students will learn to identify many tree species in our 
local forests and conduct field sampling on nutrient cycling, forest 
composition, animals of the forest, succession, and environmental quality. 
Lab exercises include tree ring analysis, leaf litter composition, and wood 
anatomy. Corequisite: BIO 272. 1 credit. 
BIO 284. BASIC ANIMAL NUTRITION 

Basic scientific fundamentals of domestic livestock nutrition, which includes 
feeding and nutritional requirements by each species, reproductive, and 
breeding requirements and general health nutritional requirements. 
Animals of focus include dairy and beef cattle, equine, canine, feline, 
porcine, and poultry. A focus on feed will also be studied for various species 
in regard to make-up, specific supplements and quantity. General anatomy 
and physiology will also be a focus, as well as general pathologies and 
nutritional deficiencies. Prerequisites: BIO 146. 3 credits. 

BIO 286. CALIFORNIA ECOSYSTEMS 

This field course introduces students to the major ecosystems of California 
through an intensive two-week travel experience in late May and early June, 
starting on the California coast north of San Francisco, traveling inland 
across the mountains, and ending in the desert east of Yosemite National 
Park. The course emphasizes the plant communities, but will discuss 
animals, soil, climate, geology, and how California’s diverse topography and 
climate shapes its diversity of ecosystems. 3 credits. 

BIO 290. ENVIRONMENTAL PHYSIOLOGY 

This course includes the study of water and temperature regulation, high 
altitude, exercise and circadian physiology. It also includes a major library 
research project. Prerequisites: BIO 146. 3 credits. 

BIO 292. FIELD ECOLOGY 

An in-depth study of the interactions between organisms and their 
environments. Topics include population structure and dynamics, 
community structure and dynamics, the diversity of ecosystems, and 
behavioral ecology. Prerequisites: BIO 146. Corequisite: BIO 293. 3 credits. 

BIO 293. FIELD ECOLOGY LAB 

A series of basic field and laboratory investigations in terrestrial and aquatic 
ecosystems based on the scientific method. Standard statistical principles 
and procedures will be used in the analysis of field and laboratory data. 
Corequisite: BIO 292. 1 credit. 

BIO 294. PARASITOLOGY 

The study of biology of parasitic and pathogenic microorganisms that cause 
harm and disease in other organisms, especially plants and animals. The 
parasites discussed in this course may include fungi, protists, viruses, 
roundworms and flatworms as well as the animals that act as vectors and 
intermediate hosts in the transmission of these pathogens from host to host. 
3 credits. 

BIO 296. BIO OF DEVELOPMENT & AGING 

This course is designed to examine embryology and aging, including cellular 
and molecular mechanisms for developmental changes. This course utilizes 
a variety of instructional methods, including laboratory activities, student 
seminar presentations, lecture and discussion. Prerequisites: BIO 142. 3 
credits. 

BIO 298. MAMMOLOGY 

This is a seminar course designed to explore the classification, distribution, 
life history and evolution of mammals through lecture, discussion, 
laboratory and field activities. Prerequisites: BIO 146. 3 credits. 

BIO 310. GENETICS 

Study of mechanisms of inheritance from Mendelian principles to modern 
concepts of molecular, cellular, and population genetics. The fine structure 
and function of genetic material is covered along with statistical methods of 
analyzing inheritance. Prerequisites: BIO 142, BIO 146, or by permission of 
instructor. Corequisite: BIO 311. 3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 171 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


BIO 311. GENETICS LAB 

Examination of classical patterns of inheritance in fungi and Drosophila 
melanogaster and molecular genetic techniques using viruses and bacteria 
are undertaken. Statistical methods of analysis including probability and chi 
square are utilized. Students pursue independent investigation of gene 
action at either the classical or molecular level. Corequisite: BIO 310. 1 
credit. 

BIO 312. MICROBIAL GENETICS 

The study of the genetic activities of microorganisms including bacteria, 
fungi and protists along with the activities of viruses in genetic 
manipulations of these and other organisms. Comparisons are made to the 
genetic activities of higher organisms. There is a significant molecular 
genetic component included. Prerequisites: BIO 146, BIO 200. Corequisite: 
BIO 313. 3 credits. 

BIO 313. MICROBIAL GENETICS LAB 

Techniques and procedures for basic and applied genetic manipulation of 
microorganisms in the laboratory, molecular procedures and methodologies 
for the genetic study of these organisms in the lab and applications toward 
genetically based industrial and environmental uses for these organisms. 
Corequisite: BIO 312. 1 credit. 

BIO 320. COMP VERTEBRATE ANATOMY 

A comparative study of the organ systems of the vertebrate animals from an 
evolutionary and developmental perspective. Prerequisites: BIO 146. 
Corequisite: BIO 321. 3 credits. 

BIO 321. COMP VERTEBRATE ANAT LAB 

The detailed dissection of representative vertebrates. Corequisite: BIO 320. 1 
credit. 

BIO 322. PLANT ANATOMY 

A detailed study of plant anatomy from the tissue level to gross anatomical 
structures. Emphasis will be given to the adaptive advantage of various 
structural features, including adaptations to water, drought, cold and 
predation. Developmental patterns will also be discussed. Corequisite: BIO 

323. 3 credits. 
BIO 323. PLANT ANATOMY LAB 

Principles covered in Bio 322 will be investigated through studies of live 
plant materials, microscopy, and models. Field and laboratory investigations 
will be made with emphasis on local plant life. Corequisite: BIO 322. 1 credit. 

BIO 330. IMMUNOLOGY 

The study of the human immune system. Beginning with the chemical 
properties of antigens, the course investigates the various avenues of 
defense of the human immune response. The basic structure and function of 
immunoglobulins and other major immunological molecules originating 
from major loci in DNA. Prerequisites: BIO 142, CHEM 240. Corequisite: BIO 

331. 3 credits. 
BIO 331. IMMUNOLOGY LAB 

Analytical studies of the major molecular factors associated with the human 
immune response. Experience with methods of isolating and purifying 
immunoglobulins, cell tissue culture, and the use of immunogenic 
compounds in investigative research methodologies. Restricted to 10 
students. Corequisite: BIO 330. 1 credit. 

BIO 334. HUMAN ANATOMY 

A course on the detailed anatomy and histology of all organ systems of the 
human body. A regional perspective will be used in some cases. This course 
is designed for students considering a career in the allied health professions. 
Prerequisites: BIO 120 and BIO 130 OR BIO 146. Corequisite: BIO 335. 3 
credits. 

BIO 335. HUMAN ANATOMY LAB 

A laboratory course designed to demonstrate through models, microscopic 
work and dissection the information presented in Bio 334. Corequisite: BIO 

334. 1 credit. 
BIO 344. HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY 

A course which explains the functional properties of the organ systems of 
the human body. Prerequisites: BIO 320, or BIO 334, BIO 142, BIO 143. 
Corequisite: BIO 345. 3 credits. 

BIO 345. HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY LAB 

A course which demonstrates the principles and concepts taught in BIO 344 
through a variety of experimental projects. Prerequisites: BIO 142, BIO 143. 
Corequisite: BIO 344. 1 credit. 

BIO 354. THE BIOLOGY OF INSECTS 

Insects are the most diverse and abundant group of animals on the face of 
the earth. This course provides a general view of all aspects of insect biology, 
including taxonomy, ecology, physiology, agricultural and medical 
importance, and potential use in forensic investigation. Prerequisites: BIO 

146. Corequisite: BIO 355. 3 credits. 
BIO 355. THE BIOLOGY OF INSECTS LAB 

The laboratory portion of the course is designed to illustrate the concepts 
and information presented in BIO 354. Specific activities will focus on insect 
collection, proper preservation, and identification. Corequisite: BIO 354. 1 
credit. 

BIO 356. INDEPENDENT STUDY 

A program of independent reading with individual tutorials on a topic 
chosen in consultation with the Biology faculty member who will supervise 
the student. The type of written paper required will be decided upon by 
supervising faculty. The student must have permission of the supervising 
faculty to register for the course. 1-3 credits. 

BIO 360. SYSTEMS PHYSIOLOGY 

A study of biochemical and biophysical aspects of the functional processes of 
animals. Emphasis on mammalian physiology. Prerequisites: BIO 142, CHEM 
113, CHEM 240. Corequisite: BIO 361. 3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 172 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


BIO 361. SYSTEMS PHYSIOLOGY LAB 

A series of experiments designed to clarify issues discussed in BIO 360. 
Corequisite: BIO 360. 1 credit. 

BIO 366. RESEARCH DESIGN 

This class focuses on the academic tools required to prepare a grant 
proposal. Class discussion, research papers and oral presentations will 
prepare the student for a research project to be conducted during the senior 
year and presented at a professional meeting and/or published in a 
professional journal. 1-3 credits. 

BIO 370. CELLULAR BIOCHEMISTRY 

The study of the molecular control mechanisms regulating the dynamics of 
integrated metabolism in cells and organ systems. The structural and 
functional aspects of genes and the importance of their products as 
exogenous and endogenous controls of integrated cellular metabolism are 
emphasized. Prerequisites: BIO 142, CHEM 240. Corequisite: BIO 371. 3 
credits. 

BIO 371. CELLULAR BIOCHEM LAB 

Study of the procedures and methodologies applied in the investigation of 
cellular biochemical activities of prokaryotic cells and eukaryotic cells and 
organelles. Corequisite: BIO 370. 1 credit. 

BIO 374. EVOLUTION 

Evolution is a central theme in biology. This course seeks to explain the key 
concepts of evolutionary science and how this accounts for the 
characteristics of living organisms and the history of life on Earth. 
Prerequisites: BIO 146. 3 credits. 

BIO 390. BIOINFORMATICS 

A practical introduction to the field of bioinformatics focused on the history 
and use of bioinformatics tools to address specific biological questions. 
Students will use the National Center for Biotechnology Information website 
to align sequences and search databases. Genome-wide sequence data will 
be manipulated to demonstrate genome assembly and transcriptome 
analysis using the Galaxy platform. Other topics addressed include single 
molecule and genome-wide sequencing techniques and nucleic acid/protein 
alignment. 3 credits. 

BIO 392. FIELD BOTANY 

A field-oriented course emphasizing the identification of local plant species 
and ecological sampling techniques. Most class periods are spent outside, 
visiting different natural areas in Erie County. Students will learn to identify 
most common native and non-native plant species by sight, how to collect 
and key out unknown species, and how to sample natural ecosystems to 
determine their community composition, structure and health.. 
Prerequisites: BIO 146, BIO 322. 3 credits. 

BIO 410. MICROBIAL ECOLOGY 

The ecology of microorganisms in natural and disturbed habitats are studied 
in natural and laboratory settings with emphasis on their effects on human 
environments, water supplies, waste treatment, landfill areas and their 
interaction with other organisms in forming community structures and in 

reclamation of disturbed areas. Prerequisites: BIO 200. Corequisite: BIO 411. 
3 credits. 

BIO 411. MICROBIAL ECOLOGY LAB 

Hands-on experience with investigative techniques applied to study 
microbial communities in natural settings and in the laboratory. Isolation, 
identification and documentation procedures and techniques for defining 
microbial activities in natural communities and the possible use of these 
organisms in reclamation of disturbed habitats. Corequisite: BIO 410. 1 
credit. 

BIO 422. MYCOLOGY 

Survey of the fungi including the mycetozoans, aquatic fungi and higher 
fungi with emphasis on taxonomy, lifecycles, physiology and fine structure 
characteristics, as well as their ecology and evolution, symbioses with other 
organisms and place within the community structure of natural habitats. 
Prerequisites: BIO 146. Corequisite: BIO 423. 3 credits. 

BIO 423. MYCOLOGY LAB 

Techniques for identification and laboratory and field studies of a wide 
variety of fungi and fungal-like organisms with emphasis placed on 
collection and isolation of organisms, identification, culturing and the 
interaction of these organisms with plants and animals in the environment. 
Corequisite: BIO 422. 1 credit. 

BIO 424. RESTORATION ECOLOGY 

An in-depth focus on the principles and practices of ecosystem and habitat 
restoration, by evaluating case studies of restored waste disposal sites, 
urban landscapes, surface mine lands, and aquatic habitats, including lakes, 
streams, wetlands, and watershed ecosystems. Topics addressed in the 
course include bio-and phytoremediation, biomonitoring, best 
management practices, and invasive species control strategies. 
Prerequisites: BIO 146. 3credits. 

BIO 426. LIMNOLOGY 

A study of the physical, chemical, and biological features of freshwater lakes 
and ponds with emphasis on the effects of light, temperature, nutrients, 
and basin morphometry on plant and animal community structure and 
productivity. Prerequisites: BIO 146. Corequisite: BIO 427. 3 credits. 

BIO 427. LIMNOLOGY LAB 

A series of field investigations comparing the major limnological features of 
man-made and natural glacier lakes and ponds in northwestern 
Pennsylvania. Corequisite: BIO 426. 1 credit. 

BIO 430. MOLECULAR BIOLOGY 

Study of the structural and functional aspects of organelles and gene 
products in prokaryotic and eukaryotic systems, including their transcription 
and translation into functional proteins during cell development and 
reproduction. Oncogene functions, recombinant DNA technology, and 
alterations of gene functions are also explored. Prerequisites: BIO 310. 3 
credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 173 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


BIO 448. POPULATION GENETICS 

This course is an introduction to the field of population genetics, the branch 
of evolutionary biology concerned with the genetic structure of populations 
and how it changes through time. Prerequisites: BIO 146, BIO 310. 3 credits. 

BIO 450. NEUROBIOLOGY 

The study of the organization and function of the human nervous system. 
This course emphasizes the relationship between structure (anatomy) and 
function (physiology) of the brain regions, the cellular mechanisms of 
synaptic transmission and nervous system development. Neurological and 
mental disorders are also covered. Prerequisites: BIO 344, PSYC 252. 3 
credits. 

BIO 456. INDEPENDENT STUDY 

A program of independent reading with individual tutorials on a topic 
chosen in consultation with the Biology faculty member who will supervise 
the student. The type of written paper required will be decided upon by 
supervising faculty. The student must have permission of the supervising 
faculty to register for the course. 3 credits. 

BIO 466. SENIOR THESIS 

In this senior capstone experience, students will design and conduct 
independent research projects in conjunction with faculty advisors. They will 
write thesis papers and present their findings to the department. 1-3 
credits. 

BIO 473. BIOLOGY INTERNSHIP 

0-3 credits. 

BIO 474. BIOLOGY PRACTICUM 

In this senior capstone experience, students will gain practical off-campus 
experience in a hospital, private industry or governmental agency. Students 
will carry out field, laboratory or other tasks appropriate for a professional 
biologist. In addition to routine work responsibilities, participants are 
expected to complete an independent research project involving exploration 
of primary literature, preparing a formal written report, and presenting their 
findings to the department. 1-3 credits. 

CHEM 101. CHEMICAL PRINCIPLES 

A survey of fundamental chemical principles. Satisfies a liberal studies and 
core requirement. Corequisite: CHEM 102. 3 credits. 

CHEM 102. CHEMICAL PRINCIPLES LAB 

Experimental work corequisite to Chemical Principles. Corequisite: CHEM 

101. 1 credit. 
CHEM 120. GEN CHEM RECITATION 

This optional course is offered in the first Mini semester concurrent with the 
full semester General Chemistry I course. This course is offered to provide 
supplementary instruction for students in quantitative reasoning and basic 
chemistry. Students who feel their level of preparation in these areas may 
be inadequate for success in General Chemistry I may consider this course. It 
is offered on a Pass-Fail basis. 1 credit. 

CHEM 121. GENERAL CHEMISTRY I 

First of two-course sequence that provides an introduction to general 
chemistry required for science majors. Emphasizes quantitative chemical 
principles. Prerequisite: Chemical background equivalent to one year of high 
school chemistry and MATH 111 or mathematical equivalent to two years of 
high school algebra. Corequisite: CHEM 122. 3 credits. 

CHEM 122. GENERAL CHEMISTRY I LAB 

Experimental work corequisite to General Chemistry I. Corequisite: CHEM 

121. 1 credit. 
CHEM 131. GENERAL CHEMISTRY II 

Continuation of General Chemistry I. Prerequisite: CHEM 121. Corequisite: 
CHEM 132. 3 credits. 

CHEM 132. GENERAL CHEM II LAB 

Experimental work corequisite to General Chemistry II. Prerequisite: CHEM 

121. Corequisite: CHEM 131. 1 credit. 
CHEM 230. QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS 

This course provides a foundation in analytical chemistry through the 
systematic study of steps in the analytical process. Topics include: statistical 
analysis, equilibria, electrochemistry, chemical separations and 
spectroscopy. Prerequisite: CHEM 242. Corequisite: CHEM 231. 3 credits. 

CHEM 231. QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS LAB 

Experimental lab work that provides hands-on knowledge of topics and 
techniques covered in CHEM 230, including the statistical analysis and 
formal reporting of gathered data. Prerequisite: CHEM 242. Corequisite: 
CHEM 230. 1 credit. 

CHEM 240. ORGANIC CHEMISTRY I 

The structure, synthesis, and reactivity of aliphatic and aromatic organic 
compounds, basic principles, mechanisms of organic reactions, applications 
of spectral methods, stereochemistry. Prerequisite: CHEM 131. Corequisite: 
CHEM 241. 3 credits. 

CHEM 241. ORGANIC CHEMISTRY I LAB 

Experimental techniques corequisite to CHEM 240. Crystallization, 
distillation and other methods used for the isolation and purification of 
organic compounds. Corequisite: CHEM 240. 1 credit. 

CHEM 242. ORGANIC CHEMISTRY II 

The chemistry and properties of functional group compounds, alcohols, 
ether, carbonyl compounds, and amines. Emphasis on multi-step syntheses 
and the solution of structural problems by a combination of chemical and 
spectroscopic methods. Prerequisite: CHEM 240. Corequisite: CHEM 243. 3 
credits. 

CHEM 243. ORGANIC CHEMISTRY II LAB 

Experiments corequisite to CHEM 242 including isolation and identification 
of natural products. Corequisite: CHEM 242. 1 credit. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 174 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


CHEM 310. ADVANCED INORGANIC CHEM 

A study of the structures and reactions of elements and inorganic 
compounds. Topics include theories of bonding, transition metal complexes, 
and the descriptive chemistry of the elements. Prerequisite: CHEM 242. 3 
credits. 

CHEM 314. ADVANCED ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 

A comprehensive study of synthetic organic chemistry strategies. This course 
will build on the material from Organic Chemistry I and II to more fully 
develop reaction mechanisms and synthetic applications. Prerequisite: 
CHEM 242. 3 credits. 

CHEM 331. BIOCHEMISTRY I 

Principles of the structure and function of biological molecules, including 
carbohydrates, lipids, membranes, proteins and enzymes, along with an 
overview of intermediary metabolism and introduction to carbohydrate 
metabolism through the study of glycolysis. Prerequisite: CHEM 242. 
Corequisite: CHEM 332. 3 credits. 

CHEM 332. BIOCHEMISTRY I LAB 

Experimental work corequisite to CHEM 331 with a focus on basic 
biochemical techniques including molecular cloning, bioinformatics, and 
protein overexpression and purification. Prerequisite: CHEM 242. 
Corequisite: CHEM 331. 1 credit. 

CHEM 333. INSTRUMENTAL ANALYSIS 

This course provides an in-depth experience in analytical chemistry by 
providing students with complete working knowledge of modern analytical 
instrumentation. Topics include: atomic and molecular spectroscopy, mass 
spectrometry, chromatography, light scattering, electrochemical analysis, 
surface analysis, and thermal analysis. Topics are placed into modern 
context by exploring ongoing research in current scientific journals. A strong 
background in chemistry and physics is required. Prerequisites: CHEM 230 
and PHYS 202. Corequisite: CHEM 334. 3 credits. 

CHEM 334. INSTRUMENTAL ANALYSIS LAB 

Experimental work corequisite to CHEM 333. Corequisite: CHEM 333. 1 
credit. 

CHEM 335. SPECTRAL INTERPRETATION 

A study of the acquisition and interpretation of IR, NMR and mass 
spectroscopy data. Prerequisite: CHEM 242. Corequisite: CHEM 336. 3 credits. 

CHEM 336. SPECTRAL INTERP LAB 

Experiments corequisite to CHEM 335. Corequisite: CHEM 335. 1 credit. 

CHEM 338. BIOCHEMISTRY II 

A comprehensive survey of the pathways and regulation of intermediary 
metabolism. Topics include anabolic and catabolic aspects of carbohydrate, 
lipid, protein and nucleotide metabolism, photosynthesis and respiration, 
and the integration and regulation of mammalian metabolism. Prerequisite: 
CHEM 331. Corequisite: CHEM 339. 3 credits. 

CHEM 339. BIOCHEMISTRY II LAB 

Experimental work corequisite to CHEM 338 with a focus on protein 
characterization via kinetic, immunological and spectroscopic methods. 
Corequisite: CHEM 338. 1 credit. 

CHEM 341. PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY I 

This course will focus on thermodynamic and kinetic methods utilized to 
predict and describe change. The laws of thermodynamics as they pertain to 
physical change and chemical reactions will be studied in depth and with 
mathematical rigor. In the kinetics portion of the course, chemical reaction 
rates and molecular reaction dynamics will be studied. Prerequisites: CHEM 
131, PHYS 202, and MATH 171. 3 credits. 

CHEM 343. EXPERIMENTAL PHYSICAL CHEM 

The course is the experimental complement to theoretical physical 
chemistry principles. Laboratory experiments in thermodynamics, 
equilibrium, kinetics and spectroscopy will be performed and the theory 
behind them discussed. In addition, computational methods investigating 
the quantum mechanical and statistical behavior of molecules will be 
introduced. Prerequisite: CHEM 341. 3 credits. 

CHEM 351. PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY II 

This course will focus on structure, including: quantum mechanical 
methods, spectroscopy and statistical mechanics. The quantum portion of 
the course will deal with the theory in depth and the connections between 
theory and experimental data the spectroscopy portion of the course will 
include rotational and vibrational spectra, electronic transitions and 
magnetic resonance. Concepts of statistical mechanics, including partition 
functions and their relationships to thermodynamics will be included. No lab 
with this course. Prerequisite: CHEM 341. 3 credits. 

CHEM 409. SENIOR SEMINAR 

An opportunity for students to present their capstone experience to the 
public. Students will work closely with a faculty member to choose their 
experience and craft a professional oral presentation. Students will gain 
valuable, career related experience as well as public speaking skills. 
Prerequisite: CHEM 410 and 412, by permission of instructor. 1 credit. 

CHEM 410. RESEARCH I 

An in-depth examination of issues surrounding chemistry and biochemistry 
research. Students will learn about how research is conducted and how to 
best prepare themselves for carrying out independent research projects. 
Students enrolled in this course will learn about: searching and reading the 
primary literature, advanced safety protocols, issues surrounding research 
ethics, and communicating science in written and oral formats. Corequesite: 
CHEM 412. 2 credits. 

CHEM 412. RESEARCH I LAB 

A formal introduction to modern scientific research methodologies. Students 
will have the opportunity to work closely with a faculty member on building 
their laboratory skills and will gain hands-on experience in advanced 
research techniques. Prerequisite: By permission of instructor. Corequesite: 
CHEM 410. 1 credit. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 175 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


CHEM 420. CHEMICAL BIOLOGY 

Chemical biology is an ever-expanding, highly interdisciplinary field that 
focuses broadly on using traditional chemistry techniques to study biological 
systems. This course investigates several biological systems that chemical 
biologists are investigating, as well as the unique chemical tools that they 
are discovering to help them better understand these systems. While this 
class will by no means cover all of the systems and tools currently being 
used by chemical biologists, it will provide a strong foundation in 
understanding chemical biology techniques and give insight into how 
chemical biologists address complex, multifaceted problems. Prerequisite: 
CHEM 242. 3 credits. 

CHEM 199, 299, 399, 499. INDEPENDENT RESEARCH 

A variable credit course that provides students an opportunity to participate 
in laboratory research under faculty guidance. Students will be exposed to 
modern research methodology and will gain hands-on experience in 
working on areas of chemical research. Students authoring a senior thesis 
must take CHEM 499. Prerequisite: By permission of instructor. 1 – for each 
course. 1-3 credits. 

CHNS 101. INTRO TO MANDARIN I 

An introduction to Mandarin Chinese, the purpose of this course is to lay a 
groundwork for the study of modern Chinese. The course will focus on the 
four language skills of listening, speaking, reading and writing. While the 
learning of sentence patterns is a major component of the course, efforts 
will be made to help students handle simple tasks such as discussing daily 
routines, asking for and giving simple directions, shopping, talking on the 
phone, reading and writing notes and letters. 3 credits. 

CHNS 102. INTRO TO MANDARIN II 

Further study of the skills introduced in CHNS 101, sounds and tones, 
vocabulary, and sentence patterns in meaningful contexts will be used in 
order for the students to communicate appropriately and accurately in 
authentic contexts. Prerequisite: CHNS 101 or equivalent. 3 credits. 

CHNS 110. FAR EASTERN IDEOGRAPHS 

Study of the origin and development of Chinese ideographs for reading 
comprehension and their aesthetic appreciation through the practice of 
shodo, "the way of the brush." No prior experience in Asian language 
required. 3 credits. 

CHNS 203. INTERMEDIATE MANDARIN I 

Students continue the development of the four language skills, expanding 
their base in introductory Chinese. Many of the grammatical constructions 
introduced in 101 and 102 will be repeated in this course with increasing 
sophistication in terms of style and usage. Prerequisite: CHNS 102 or 
equivalent. 3 credits. 

CHNS 204. INTERMEDIATE MANDARIN II 

An intensive study of the four abilities in Chinese language built on the 
knowledge and skills acquired from Intermediate Chinese I, with an 
emphasis on more sophisticated grammatical patterns, situational 
conversations, and reading. Prerequisite: CHNS 203 or equivalent. 3 credits. 

CHNS 208. CONTEMPORARY READINGS 

An advanced stage in learning the written Mandarin language. The course 
aims to improve learners’ language proficiency in reading short stories, 
newspaper articles, and excerpts from longer works in Mandarin, as well as 
literary selections. Learners will develop advanced vocabulary, and skills in 
reading comprehension of formal and informal texts. Prerequisite: CHNS 

204. 3 credits. 
CHNS 210. CONVERSATION/COMP I 

Based on the language foundation built in Intermediate Chinese, this course 
is designed to develop learners’ communicative skills in Mandarin Chinese. 
Students will develop listening skills, build vocabulary, and gain a deeper 
understanding of structure and idioms, through guided and spontaneous 
conversation and written composition. Prerequisite: CHNS 204. 3 credits. 

COM 101. COMMUNICATION IN SOCIETY 

An overview of communication in the U.S. and around the world including 
legal, ethical and social issues, this course examines the relationship 
between media and society, history of mass media and development of 
communication industry. This survey class examines print journalism, movie 
industry, media research, magazines, advertising, public relations, new 
technologies and more. 3 credits. 

COM 102. INTERPERSONAL COMM 

This course provides an overview of the basic concepts of interpersonal 
communication in group and dyadic settings. Students will gain knowledge 
in the communication process, perception, listening, self-disclosure, ethics, 
nonverbal communication, conflict, power, relationships and dysfunctional 
communication. Further, students will have the opportunity to think 
critically about the material presented through an individual journal and 
through a term project that explores application of theories and concepts to 
modern day activities. 3 credits. 

COM 110. ORAL COMMUNICATION 

Students learn basic presentation skills including techniques for informative 
and persuasive speaking. The course focuses on audience analysis, research 
skills, organizational principles, writing, delivery and critical analysis of 
presentations. 3 credits. 

COM 150. WRITING FUNDAMENTALS 

Students receive an intensive drill in grammar, punctuation, syntax and 
word usage in contexts designed especially for future professional 
communicators. The class provides an overview of journalistic principles in 
accordance with Associated Press style. 3 credits. 

COM 160. FILM APPRECIATION 

An analysis of the aesthetic nature of film, its history, and how film has 
influenced society. 3 credits. 

COM 190. MAJORING IN COMMUNICATION 

This is an opportunity to gain insight into majoring in communication, an 
overview of the various concentrations offered, potential careers and 
graduate schools, as well as the basic business protocol and etiquette 
expected from communication professionals and, subsequently, the 
department. 0 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 176 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


COM 210. MINDFUL COMMUNICATION 

Communication is something we do every day but as the pace of our lives— 
and the number of message channels—increase, people can lose focus on 
the message they are sending or how they are responding. Reacting 
automatically (or mindlessly) can damage personal and business 
relationships and create more stress in our lives. This assists students in 
expanding consciousness in daily living by learning about principles of 
mindfulness and how mindfulness can allow one to be a better 
communicator. 3 credits. 

COM 211. COMM THEORY & RESEARCH 

This course explores theories and research methods used in communication; 
specifically, the course demonstrates how theory guides practice and the 
nature of theory as it is used in the field of communication. Further, the 
course provides students with the concepts, methods and tools through a 
conceptual and practical understanding of primary, secondary, qualitative 
and quantitative research. Through readings, discussion, research, writing 
and in-class activities, students will learn how communication theories are 
developed, analyzed, evaluated and applied to real-world situations and 
will develop skills needed to criticize research literature and apply basic 
research methods to understand a research problem. 3 credits. 

COM 219. COMMUNICATION THEORY 

This course explores theories of communication; specifically, the course 
demonstrates how theory guides practice and the nature of theory as it is 
used in the field of communication. Through readings, discussion, research, 
writing and in-class activities, students will learn how communication 
theories are developed, analyzed, evaluated and applied to real-world 
situations. 3 credits. 

COM 240. DIGITAL VIDEO PRODUCTION I 

Students are given basic instruction in producing video utilizing computer 
software. Instruction combines theoretical concepts with practical field 
experience. 3 credits. 

COM 241. MEDIA PERFORMANCE 

This course explores styles of speech, analysis and interpretation of copy, 
voice development, on-camera behavior and techniques in both radio and 
television and more broadly in various types of performance. The general 
objective is to make the student a more effective communicator. 3 credits. 

COM 250. NEWSWRITING 

A fundamental course in journalistic writing that focuses on reporting, 
writing, producing and presenting news stories in varied formats. Research 
strategies, interviewing, data collection, critique and history of journalism 
are also covered. Prerequisite: COM 150. 3 credits. 

COM 251. BROADCAST NEWSWRITING 

Students learn preparation of copy and news packages for radio, television 
and streaming video. This course includes videography, video and audio 
editing and news programming. Prerequisite: COM 150. 3 credits. 

COM 260. INTRO TO SOCIAL MEDIA 

This course introduces students to social media in its many forms, which 
have changed the role of communication professionals. 3 credits. 

COM 261. PRINCIPLES OF PUBLIC RELATIONS 

This course explores how and why organizations communicate with various 
public to help create, maintain, enhance and change organizational 
reputations. 3 credits. 

COM 269. SPECIAL TOPICS 

These courses focus on issues relevant to future communication 
professionals and innovative topics in the field of communication. Topics 
vary from year-to-year. 3 credits. 

COM 270. PRACTICUM 

Students receive hands-on experience with the on-campus communication 
resources and other University offices. (Other on-campus activities meeting 
the hour requirement and that achieve the same objective may be 
substituted with instructor approval.) Prerequisite: COM 101 and sophomore 
standing. 1 credit. 

COM 290. SOPHOMORE REVIEW 

The Sophomore Review serves to provide a review of the student's work to 
date in the program as well as a writen and oral presentation of their plans 
and ambitions for the final years of their education as well as their future 
career plans. The review also includes a formal interview/discussion 
between the student and the review committee. continuation as a 
commuunication major requires a successful passing of sophomore review 
by the review committee. Prerequisite: COM 101, 110, 211/219, 250, 260. 0 
credits. 

COM 310. HUMAN BEHAVIOR&PERSUASION 

Students examine the basic theories regarding persuasion as they function 
in mediated messages and the psychographic profiling of audiences and 
populations. 3 credits. 

COM 311. COMM LAW & ETHICS 

This course prepares future professional communicators to make informed 
media decisions, through understanding the historical, legal and ethical 
context for judgment of issues in mass media through in-class discussion, 
simulation and modeling. The legislative, regulatory and case law that 
governs professional communication with an emphasis on the law’s role in 
protecting or in inhibiting communicators’ activities is covered. 3 credits. 

COM 312. COMM & SOC RESPONSIBILITY 

This class explores the power of professional communication and the 
responsibilities it creates for practitioners. Various codes of ethics available 
within the industry will be explored and students create a personal code of 
values and principles of practice to guide their decision making in the field. 
3 credits. 

COM 313. CRISIS COMMUNICATION* 

Students are exposed to the theories of and major case studies in crisis 
communication. Techniques and strategies in crisis communication are 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 177 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


explored and students apply their knowledge through a crisis management 
project. 3 credits. 

COM 314. GLOBAL COMMUNICATION* 

An examination of interpersonal, organizational and mass communication 
as it occurs around the world as well as the influence of communication 
systems on cultures. 3 credits. 

COM 320. RESEARCH & ANALYSIS 

Communication Research Methods provides students with the concepts, 
methods and tools of research through a conceptual and practical 
understanding of primary, secondary, qualitative and quantitative research. 
Prerequisite: MATH 109 or MIS 150. 3 credits. 

COM 321. WEB & SOCIAL MEDIA ANALYTICS 

This course seeks to understand web, business and communication 
intelligence through the lens of digital analytic collection, synthesis and 
reporting. Students will extract data from the web and social media tools 
and will learn to analyze the data using a variety of tools. A study of the 
history and theories surrounding web and social media analytics, an intro to 
web analytics, measuring campaigns online, and search engine optimization 
will be covered in this course. At the completion of the course, students will 
be prepared to take the Google Analytics IQ test, the only industry-
recognized certification. Prerequisite: COM 260. 3 credits. 

COM 330. WEB & SOC MEDIA STRATEGIES 

This course unpacks social networks, social media platforms and online 
communication, advertising and marketing. This course will evaluate the 
impact of social media on interpersonal and customer relationships, public 
relations, marketing, politics, and journalism. Topics will include web and 
social media marketing and campaigns, digital storytelling, crowdsourcing 
and online visual interaction. Using content gathered in the course, students 
will conclude the term by developing a campaign in coordination with the 
Google Marketing Competition or another client-based project assigned by 
the instructor. Prerequisite: COM 260. 3 credits. 

COM 340. DIGITAL VIDEO PRODUCTN II 

Practical training and theoretical concepts of the process of selecting visual 
and aural components for editing. Classroom instruction centers on basic 
editing principles and utilizes numerous examples. Prerequisite: COM 240. 3 
credits. 

COM 350. FEATURE WRITING 

This extensive writing course explores strategies for developing feature 
stories for web, newspapers, newsletters and magazines. The class 
emphasizes gathering information and developing a story from nonfiction 
topics including personal experiences, personality profiles, consumer pieces 
and travel articles. Students practice the skills necessary to write in varied 
formats for publication. Prerequisite: COM 150. 3 credits. 

COM 352. MULTIMEDIA WRITING 

This course provides instruction and experience writing and editing copy for 
a variety of communication materials. The class explores a variety of tools at 
the professional communicator’s disposal as well as how these are applied 

to various situations and audiences. Students develop competencies in 
creating content and understanding structure of writing for both print and 
web. Prerequisite: COM 150. 3 credits. 

COM 390. PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 

This course focuses on print and online portfolio development and provides 
students with opportunities and skills needed to secure an internship or job 
in their field. Career-related issues include résumé and portfolio 
development, interviewing, business etiquette and workplace standards. 
Prerequisite: Junior standing. Communication Department majors only. 3 
credits. 

COM 430. COMMUNICATION MANAGEMENT 

Students will practice developing, executing and evaluating complex 
communication plans for clients or communities to reach set goals and/or 
objective. In addition, the course content covers client management, 
budgeting and bidding. Prerequisite: Senior standing or instructor 
permission. Communication Department majors only. 3 credits. 

COM 431. STRATEGIC COMMUNICATION* 

Students will practice developing, executing and evaluating complex 
integrated communication plans. This course looks at various case studies 
and contexts including agencies, nonprofit organizations, brand strategy 
firms, corporations and more. Prerequisite: COM 352. 3 credits. 

COM 440. DIGITAL STORYTELLING 

This course focuses on gathering information and relaying it to a mass 
audience through various technologies, including blogs, websites and 
podcasts. Content includes online journalistic writing (using video, 
copywriting and photography), identifying and creating elements of a good 
story, merging research into writing, and synthesis of information. 
Prerequisite: COM 352, ART 321, COM 240. 3 credits. 

COM 441. PRODUCTION MANAGEMENT 

Students are responsible for organizing and airing a series for Laker TV and 
streaming video. Prerequisite: COM 341. 3 credits. 

COM 442. CONVERGENCE MGMT* 

This course ties together print, broadcast, and computer skills, theory and 
practice, for the new digital media world. Students are challenged to extend 
their knowledge by creating specific digital content for a campus media 
(Merciad, Laker TV, WMCE, podcasts). 3 credits. 

COM 473. COMMUNICATIONS INTERN 

Students gain on-the-job training and experience applying theory and 
technique they have learned in the classroom to their chosen career 
interests. This supervised experience working with professionals relates 
academic training to professional experience. Supervised opportunities 
include working with an approved regional, national and international 
approved business, industry, agency, or institution. Students must complete 
a minimum of 150 hours. Prerequisite: Junior standing, chair approval. 0-3 
credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 178 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


COM 475. COMMUNICATIONS INTERNSHIP 

Students gain on-the-job training and experience applying theory and 
technique they have learned in the classroom to their chosen career 
interests. This supervised experience working with professionals relates 
academic training to professional experience. Supervised opportunities 
include working with an approved regional, national and international 
approved business, industry, agency, or institution. Students must complete 
a minimum of 150 hours. Prerequisite: Junior standing, chair approval. 3 
credits. 

COM 480. ENTREPRENEURSHIP* 

This course provides students an opportunity to explore a topic of interest 
that may not be offered by the communication curriculum but is important 
for the student's career. The topic and learning objectives are determined by 
the faculty supervisor and student and are approved by the department 
chair. Prerequisite: Faculty sponsor and department chair approval. 3 
credits. 

COM 490. COMMUNICATION CAPSTONE 

This capstone course is aimed at providing students with hands-on 
opportunities to integrate and demonstrate the knowledge and skills they 
have acquired in their four years of learning. Students will work on teams to 
emulate real-world working environments. Students will work with real 
clients and/or real-world issues to solve a business problem using the skills 
and knowledge acquired throughout their tenure and deliver tangible 
outputs based on the client’s goals. A final senior portfolio is presented as 
part of the class as well. Prerequisite or co-requisite: Senior standing and 
completion of all major courses or instructor approval. Communication 
Department majors only. 3 credits. 

COMP 100. CRITICAL AND EVALUATIVE WRITING 

This course builds the critical thinking skills necessary for reading expository 
texts. Students will practice active approaches to reading and note taking, 
and develop skills in summarizing, analyzing and evaluating argumentative 
writing. 3 credits. 

COMP 110. COMPOSITION 

Offers a practical introduction to academic writing, including instruction on 
essential components of the argumentative essay such as thesis statements, 
transitions, and paragraphing. Emphasis is placed on planning and 
organizing a persuasive argument, writing for an audience, and revising 
drafts based on feedback. 3 credits. 

COMP 120. RESEARCH AND WRITING 

Focuses on developing sustained academic arguments supported with 
research. The class emphasizes skills in reading, thinking critically, 
identifying research topics, gathering and assessing both print and 
electronic sources, and composing well-structured, focused arguments. 3 
credits. 

CRJS 101. JUSTICE IN AMERICA 

This course provides students with an understanding of the criminal justice 
system in America. An examination of the role of the police, the court 
systems, and the processes of corrections will be presented which enables 

students to critically analyze success as well as inherent weaknesses within 
the administration of justice in our society. Included will be a survey of 
problems, trends, and jurisdiction of local, state, and federal agencies 
engaged in the criminal justice process. Students will become familiar with 
those qualifications and requirements that criminal justice agencies have 
established for entry-level positions. 3 credits. 

CRJS 104. INTRO TO CORRECTIONS 

This is an introduction to corrections systems and their relationship to the 
American criminal justice system. Students learn the objectives, policies, 
and procedures of probation, parole and prisons as well as some of the 
issues and problems. 3 credits. 

CRJS 203. DEVIANT BEHAVIOR 

A psychological and sociological examination of pathological behavior. The 
course will include discussion of deviancy as a problem in both individual 
adjustment and social organization. 3 credits. 

CRJS 205. INTRO JUV JUSTICE & DELINQ 

This is the foundation course in juvenile justice which provides an overview 
of the juvenile justice system and the study of juvenile delinquency. It 
examines the nature and development of delinquency against the backdrop 
of normal adolescent development. Research and theory are used to help 
the student distinguish between typical forms of adolescent exploration and 
indications of potentially serious delinquency. A variety of sociological, 
social psychological, and psychological theories of delinquency are 
reviewed. Cross-listed with SOC 205. 3 credits. 

CRJS 207. POLICE FUNCTIONS 

This course provides an overview of basic line functions found within state 
and local law enforcement agencies. Included are patrol procedures and 
community policing concepts being undertaken that enhance relationships 
between the police and the community they serve. The role of other 
operating components found within law enforcement agencies will be 
explored along with the responsibilities of the services and auxiliary 
bureaus. Prerequisite: CRJS 101. 3 credits. 

CRJS 208. CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION 

The course presents basic procedures in the investigation of criminal 
matters. Topics include interview procedures, crime scene examinations, 
development of information, procedures for solving crimes, criminalistics, 
and the use of forensic sciences. Prerequisites: CRJS 101, CRJS 207. 3 credits. 

CRJS 219. CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION II 

This course will emphasize the application of the methods and techniques 
introduced in Criminal Investigation I. The elements of various types of 
crimes will be examined, along with investigative techniques that aid in 
fulfilling the legal and procedural requirements of those elements, with an 
ultimate goal of preparation of the investigation for prosecution. 
Prerequisite: CRJS 208. 3 credits. 

CRJS 220. DRUGS,CRIME & CRIM JUSTICE 

This course provides the student with an understanding of drug abuse, 
crime, and the criminal justice system. The primary focus is on how police, 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 179 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


courts, and corrections systems respond to drug-related crimes and drug-
abusing offenders. The course reviews the history of the drug-crime nexus, 
compares criminal justice policies on drug abuse, critiques intervention 
strategies, and considers future initiatives to reduce the drug problem. 
Cross-listed with SOC 220. 3 credits. 

CRJS 222. HUMAN BEHAVIOR IN CORRECTIONS 

This course examines the nature of correctional institutions and 
institutionalization. The scope of study includes the perspectives of both 
practitioner and prisoner. In addition, the social and political dimensions of 
corrections policies are examined. Prerequisite: CRJS 104. 3 credits. 

CRJS 228. TREATMENT ADOL BEH PROB 

This course focuses on the latest research-based approaches to the 
rehabilitation of adolescents who are either involved in delinquent behavior 
or at risk of involvement. It emphasizes cognitive, cognitive behavioral, 
familial and multi-systemic approaches. Prerequisite: CRJS/SOC 205. Cross-
listed with SOC 228. 3 credits. 

CRJS 230. CRIMINOLOGY 

An in-depth analysis of criminal behavior systems, theoretical developments 
in explaining crime, and research methodology used in Modern American 
Criminology. Prerequisite: CRJS 101. Cross-listed with SOC 230. 3 credits. 

CRJS 240. VICTIMOLOGY 

This course focuses on the developing branch of criminology which is 
designed to study the crime victim. Included will be victim vulnerability (the 
susceptibility of certain groups of people to victimization) and culpability 
(the actions on the part of individuals which, under certain circumstances, 
suggest victims may be partly responsible for their own victimization). 
Recently enacted laws pertaining to the rights of victims will be examined. 
Prerequisite: CRJS 101. Cross listed with SOC 240. 3 credits. 

CRJS 242. SPECIAL TOPICS 

When offered, this course will focus on a special topic within the field of 
criminology or criminal justice. Examples include: Crime Prevention; Drugs, 
Crime, and Culture as seen through The Wire. 3 credits. 

CRJS 245. PSYCHOLOGY AND THE LAW 

The application of psychological principles, research and knowledge to legal 
issues and proceedings is growing rapidly. This course will deal broadly with 
the interface between psychology and the law. As such it will critically 
investigate the wide range of contemporary applications of psychology to a 
variety of topics including: understanding the origins and treatment of 
criminally deviant behavior, psychological autopsies, criminal profiling, jury 
selection, eye-witness testimony, repressed memory, persuasive 
communication in the courtroom, child abuse investigations, competence 
determination and the insanity defense. Prerequisite: PSYC 101. Cross listed 
with PSYC 240. 3 credits. 

CRJS 280. JUVENILE JUSTICE SYSTEM 

This course examines the major professional, statutory and constitutional 
issues affecting the professional working within the juvenile justice arena. It 
examines in some detail the way in which juvenile delinquency cases are 

processed by police, probation departments, and the courts. The historical 
and political context of current practice is reviewed. The course also provides 
for students information about the wide variety of professional roles 
available to students interested in juvenile justice and the expectations and 
qualifications for each role. Prerequisite: CRJS/SOC 205. 3 credits. 

CRJS 285. APPROACHES TO JUV DELINQ 

A second-level course which examines in more detail the nature, diagnostic 
assessment, and treatment of delinquency. Practical diagnostic procedures 
are examined along with their implications for treatment. Interpretation 
and use of psychological and psychiatric evaluations are also examined. 
Such issues as socialized versus unsocialized delinquency, conduct disorders 
and psychopathy, drug and alcohol abuse, and the delinquent life-style are 
examined. The spectrum of community and facility based treatment 
programs and their appropriateness for types of delinquents are reviewed. 
Prerequisite: CRJS/SOC 205. 3 credits. 

CRJS 300. CRIMINAL LAW 

This class explores the crimes code as it relates to the basic elements of 
crimes, burden of proof in criminal cases, and defenses available to criminal 
defendants, along with the concept of jurisdiction and the history of 
criminal law. 3 credits. 

CRJS 304. STREET GANGS CONTEMP SOC 

This course examines contemporary street gangs in America. Students will 
gain a better understanding of street gangs and learn to apply this 
knowledge by analyzing innovative police strategies. The course focuses on 
theories about street gangs and deviance in addition to examining what 
gang members do in their everyday lives. Since street gangs continue to be a 
focal concern for police agencies, the course also examines innovative 
strategies to reduce gang violence. 3 credits. 

CRJS 305. ISSUES IN CRIMINAL JUSTICE 

A concentrated study of selected critical issues in the criminal justice system. 
These issues, which are significant, timely, and of concern to both 
academicians and practitioners in the areas of law enforcement, the courts, 
the corrections, and the juvenile justice field, will be treated in order to give 
the student a realistic grasp of their nature and ramifications. Prerequisite: 
CRJS 101. 3 credits. 

CRJS 306. SEM:ORG&WHITE COLLAR CRIME 

This course will examine corporate, occupational, professional, and 
organized crime, the biggest growth area of crime and law enforcement 
activity. Through analysis of cases, recent legal developments, and 
literature, emerging trends in the criminal justice system’s response to these 
types of crime will be explored. Cross-listed with SOC 306. 3 credits. 

CRJS 308. POLICE ADMINISTRATION 

This course is designed to explore and analyze the principles of 
administration and management within modern police agencies. This 
exploration will include examination of the multiple internal and external 
forces at work within police agencies, as well as the responsibilities and 
interrelationships of administrative, supervisory, line and staff services. 3 
credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 180 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


CRJS 309. CONTEMP POLICE PROBLEMS 

A survey of problematic areas encountered by the police and their role 
within the social order. Included will be significant new approaches used to 
enhance relationships between the police and the community that they 
serve and a reexamination 
of written directives used by police in a 
changing society. Prerequisite: CRJS 207. 3 credits. 

CRJS 310. CON LAW IN CRIM PROCEDURE 

A study of the judicial process and the legal framework be encountered by 
criminal justice practitioners. Emphasis is placed on the first, fourth, fifth, 
sixth, eighth, and 14th amendments to the U.S. Constitution. This course 
focuses on criminal law factors and evidentiary procedures from 
investigation through adjudication. Students will participate in a mock trial 
in order to synthesize the skills they have developed in this course. 
Prerequisite: Junior-Senior. 3 credits. 

CRJS 313. CRISIS INTER SKILL CJ & SOCW 

This course is designed to enable students to develop effective crisis 
intervention strategies. The theories and skills taught prepare students to 
deal with crises they will face in their careers. Students will learn to identify 
potential crises, deescalate situations and provide appropriate crisis 
interventions in a variety of situations. Sophomore status or above. 3 
credits. 

CRJS 315. PROF PRACTICE CORRECTIONS 

An advanced course in corrections stressing the skills necessary for 
competent practice. The course will emphasize the formulation of policy and 
procedure on a national scale. Prerequisite: CRJS 104. 3 credits. 

CRJS 317. PROF PRACTICE JUV JUSTICE 

This course is designed to prepare the juvenile justice student for 
professional practice in the field. It does so by integrating information about 
the Juvenile Justice System with information about the etiology, 
manifestation, and treatment of juvenile delinquency, in a manner that 
facilitates the application of theory and knowledge to actual practice. 
Prerequisite: CRJS/SOC 205. 3 credits. 

CRJS 318. INTRO TO CRJS RESEARCH 

An introduction to social science research, with emphasis on research 
appropriate to criminal justice. Students learn to form research questions, to 
select and carry out appropriate research strategies, and to present findings 
in a professional manner. Prerequisites: CRJS 101; CRJS/SOC 230. 3 credits. 

CRJS 322. LEGAL RESEARCH & WRITING 

This course will introduce students to the legal research process through 
both classroom and library experience. Students will become familiar with 
the major sources of legal research and will complete a research assignment 
which will require the use of several types of sources. This course will also 
emphasize the principles and techniques of legal writing, including proper 
analysis and appropriate citation. Recommended for Pre-Law students. 
Cross-listed with POLI 322. 3 credits. 

CRJS 326. POLICE ADMINISTRATION 

The course focuses on the principles of administration and management in 
modern police agencies, including responsibilities and interrelationships of 
administrative, line, and staff services. Included are fundamentals of 
supervisory techniques and personnel practices and processes. Prerequisites: 
CRJS 101, CRJS 207, CRJS 309. 3 credits. 

CRJS 328. CORRECTIONS ADMIN 

This course examines the organization and administration of correctional 
programs and institutions. Management concepts and elements of the 
administrative process are presented. Attention is given to the problems of 
staffing and personnel management, implementing correctional policies 
and ideology, and responding to offender needs. Prerequisite: CRJS 104. 3 
credits. 

CRJS 330. ISSUES IN JUVENILE JUSTICE 

This seminar encourages students to explore contemporary issues in juvenile 
justice. A variety of topics of contemporary interest are examined by the 
seminar including serious and chronic juvenile offending, the delinquency-
drug connection, juvenile sex offenders, and gang related delinquency, 
among others. Students are encouraged to examine these topics both from 
the perspective of contemporary theory of the social and psychological 
dynamics that give rise to the behavior and from the perspective of the 
individuals actually engaging in the behavior. Prerequisite: CRJS/SOC 205. 3 
credits. 

CRJS 333. SEM: HIGH RISK/SPEC NEED 

An explanation of the trends in criminal justice which recognize the diversity 
of offenders that are processed the criminal justice system. From both the 
police and corrections perspective, the course will analyze the issues which 
prompted a specialized approach to various offender groups. Material will 
include elderly offenders, mentally retarded and emotionally disturbed 
offenders, sexual deviants, and drug/alcohol abusers. Speakers and visual 
aids will be utilized. Prerequisite: CRJS 101. 3 credits. 

CRJS 335. SEMINAR: WOMEN & CRIME 

Students will discuss women as victims, women as offenders, and women as 
practitioners in the field of criminal justice. Special attention will be given to 
the topics of intimate partner violence and sexual assault; women who are 
incarcerated and their family relationships; and women who hold positions 
in policing, courts and corrections. Content also examines processing 
throughout the entire system and also considers social and political 
influence on official policies and practices. 3 credits. 

CRJS 337. SOCIOLOGY OF LAW 

This course provides students with an understanding of the purposes and 
process of criminal and civil law in the United States. Among the topics 
covered are: the origins, development, and function of the law; the structure 
and function of courts, legislatures, and administrative agencies; the 
commercialization of the legal profession; the politicalization of 
punishment; race, class, gender and the law; law and social control; and the 
role of law in social change. Cross-listed with SOC 337. 3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 181 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


CRJS 338. RACE CRIME & JUSTICE 

This course analyzes the issues surrounding racial and ethnic minorities and 
the criminal justice system. Topics include group differences in offending, 
processing, victimization and employment in criminal justice agencies. A 
significant emphasis will be placed on the empirical research conducted on 
the social construction of race and ethnicity, differential involvement in 
crime, and differential treatment or enforcement of the law. 3 credits. 

CRJS 343. CRIMINAL JUSTICE ETHICS 

This course balances theoretical principles and practical issues as they relate 
to the administration of justice. The focus is on the movement toward 
professional ethics and the growing emphasis on value-laden questions and 
policy decisions among scholars, researchers, and criminal justice 
practitioners. Prerequisite: CRJS 101. 3 credits. 

CRJS 344. CORRECTIONS COUNSELING 

A course designed to provide the student with basic counseling practice 
skills. Included is a study of basic counseling theory as applied to the 
offender. Prerequisite: CRJS 104. 3 credits. 

CRJS 350. ANTECEDENTS OF AGGRESSION 

The course explores the origins and development of human aggressive 
behavior with an eye towards its control and treatment. Classical 
formulations of the issue by Thomas Hobbes and Jean-Jacques Rousseau are 
presented as well as contemporary psychological, sociological, and 
criminological formulations. Students are exposed to issues in the 
philosophy of social science, e.g., reductionism and changing views of 
causality. Course also examines the origins of nonaggression and how 
aggression might be managed in a complex multicultural society. 
Prerequisite: CRJS/SOC 205. Cross listed with PSYC 350. 3 credits. 

CRJS 352. SEM: POLI CRIME & TERROR 

This course will examine political crimes committed for ideological 
purposes, both against the state and by the state. Included are activities 
such as secret police, human rights violations, genocide, crimes of officials of 
government, and illegal surveillance and experiments. In addition, crimes of 
protest, espionage, political whistle-blowing and, in particular, terrorism 
will be explored. 3 credits. 

CRJS 354. ADULT PROB/PAROLE SUPERV 

This course provides an in-depth look into adult probation and parole issues 
and general practices of supervision for offenders in county, state and 
federal agencies in the United States. Students will learn how to recognize 
the rehabilitative needs of an offender and adjust supervision strategies in 
accordance with court ordered conditions, set casework priorities and gather 
factual information on defendants after conviction. Prerequisite: CRJS 101. 3 
credits. 

CRJS 360. SEM: COMPLEX CRIM INVESTIG 

This course is designed to concentrate on criminal investigations that are 
intricate by their commission and formidable to solve and prosecute due to 
their complexity. The focus is upon the gathering of criminal intelligence 
information, informant recruitment and control, and undercover and 
surveillance methodology, multi-agency task force coordination, technical 

evidentiary gathering (including legal requirements, case management and 
reporting and prosecution of those who direct these criminal conspiracies. 
Prerequisite: CRJS 208. 3 credits. 

CRJS 382. CRIME, GENDER & VIOL IN MOD WORLD 

The course will examine the influence of gender, ethnicity, and race on 
crime and justice throughout the Modern World (Americas, Europe, Russia, 
Middle East, Africa and Asia). Topics include: the historical development of 
crime and justice; women and men and the law; sexual harassment; women 
and men as victims of violence (rape, domestic violence, pornography, 
trafficking etc.); issues of gender and race; women/men and prison; and 
women/men and terrorism. Cross-list with HIS 382. 3 credits. 

CRJS 410. SENIOR SEMINAR 

This seminar is required of Criminal Justice majors in order to graduate with 
a degree in Criminal Justice. The course is open to students with senior 
standing who have declared a major in Criminal Justice. Students will 
discuss and explore current topics in the criminal justice field, will complete 
a service learning project, and will participate in professional development 
activities. Students will also complete the Criminal Justice Major Field Test, 
a survey which will assess knowledge of criminal justice. Prerequisite: 
Seniors only. Spring semester only. 3 credits. 

CRJS 473. CRIMINAL JUSTICE INTERN 

The Internship is a placement with a law enforcement agency, program, or 
department that provides opportunities to observe and participate in roles 
and responsibilities to gain experience in the practice, policy, and 
procedures of law enforcement. Students will be expected to complete a 
research paper developing a solution to a law enforcement problem 
encountered during the internship. Open to students who are recommended 
by the department and who have a minimum of a 2.5 GPA. 0-3 credits. 

CRJS 475. CRIMINAL JUSTICE INTERN 

The Internship is a placement with a probation, parole, or corrections 
agency, department, or institution that provides opportunities to observe 
and participate in roles and responsibilities to gain experience in the 
practice, policy, and procedures of corrections. Students will be expected to 
complete a research paper developing a solution to a corrections problem 
encountered during the internship. Open to students who are recommended 
by the department and who have a minimum of a 2.5 GPA. 3 credits. 

CRJS 476. CRIMINAL JUSTICE INTERN 

The Internship is a placement with a juvenile justice agency, program, or 
department that provides opportunities to observe and participate in roles 
and responsibilities to gain experience in the practice, policy, and 
procedures of juvenile justice. Students will be expected to complete a 
research paper developing a solution to a juvenile justice problem 
encountered during the internship. Open to students who are recommended 
by the department and who have a minimum of a 2.5 GPA. 6 credits. 

CST 100. EXPLORING CATHOLICISM 

This course will comb the rich history and tradition of Roman Catholicism 
from the life of Jesus to the contemporary church. It will highlight key social 
and historical developments, major Catholic thinkers, and fundamental 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 182 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


teachings related to Catholic belief, life, and discipleship in the 21st century. 
3 credits. 

CST 210. MANY FACES OF MARY 

This course will examine the history and development of the cult of the 
Blessed Virgin Mary in the economy of salvation from the Christian/Catholic 
perspective while examining closely those doctrines/dogmas associated 
with Mary and their place in the tradition of the Church. Special emphasis 
will be given to the teaching of the Second Vatican Ecumenical Council 
(1962-65) on this topic and contemporary theologies of Mary, both from the 
Christian and other religious perspectives. 3 credits. 

CST 250. THEOLOGY OF THE CHURCH 

This course is an exploration of the origins, historical development, and 
contemporary doctrine and theology of the Christian Church that would 
evolve into Roman Catholicism. Particular emphasis will be placed on the 
theology of the Second Vatican Ecumenical Council (1962-1965) and 
contemporary ecclesiologies relevant to the church’s structure today as well 
as examining future trends in church anthropology. 3 credits. 

CST 260. VATICAN II 

This course will have three foci. Initially, it will explore the historic context 
of Vatican II. Second, the course will offer an examination of key theological 
and spiritual teachings from the documents produced by the Council. 
Finally, the course will focus on “living Vatican II.” Students will engage 
with churches, communities and organizations that reflect the influence of 
Vatican II in these the early years of the Council’s impact in the world, in 
Christianity and in Roman Catholicism. 3 credits. 

CST 275 CATHOLICISM AND SOCIAL JUSTICE 

The collective body of Catholic Social Teaching and its ongoing examination 
of issues such as development, ecology, poverty, peace, discrimination, 
human rights, economic theory, and labor conditions are the focus of this 
course. The course will study the cultural factors surrounding the 
emergence of this teaching tradition, its major themes and underlying 
moral imagination, debates and tensions within the tradition, and its 
engagement with policy and praxis. 3 credits. 

CST 280: DESERT MOTHERS AND FATHERS 

The desert mothers and fathers were ascetic Christians whose religious 
practice—involving the discipline of the body in order to attend to spiritual 
growth—exerted a profound influence on the development of ancient 
Christianity. By providing students with exposure to these historically 
significant figures this course allows students to explore different modalities 
of Christian being and helps them to contextualize renunciant practices still 
being practiced today. 3 credits. 

CST 290. CATHOLIC SPIRITUALITY 

From its earliest times the Roman Catholic Tradition has been enriched and 
diversified through specific spiritualties embodied by individuals and 
communities. Through lecture, projects and discussion students will explore 
historic and contemporary monastic movements, saints and mystics while 
coming to an appreciation of the variety of spiritual expressions in the 
Church. Students will analyze and experience spiritual traditions while 

investigating the dynamic interplay of contemplation and action in the 
Christian life. 3 credits. 

CST 295. CATHOLIC VALUES 

This course will examine the current understanding of moral thought from a 
Catholic Christian perspective. Historical sources and traditions of morality 
are explored as well as what makes Christian morality distinctive and 
relevant in the 21st century. Illustrations, case studies and individual stories 
will place the material in a contemporary context while challenging 
students to reflect upon what they really value for a life well lived. 
3 credits. 

CST 300. FOUNDATIONS FOR YOUTH & YOUNG ADULT MINISTRY 

This seminar course investigates lay ecclesial ministry and theological 
reflection using the specific lens of ministry with youth, young adults and 
emerging adults. Students will confront the complexities of spiritual 
development through a variety of case studies. Students will analyze terms 
such as ministry, evangelization and catechesis while considering the fertile 
and complex intersection of Church and culture. 3 credits. 

DANC 100. DANCE APPRECIATION 

This course is an introduction to dance as a creative discipline and cultural 
expression that reflects the pressures of the historical and sociopolitical 
context from which it emerges. Course work consists of lecture, discussion, 
films, papers, group assignments, presentations, and includes attendance at 
live concerts. Participation in movement experiences may include jazz, 
ballet, modern/contemporary, musical theater, social dance techniques and 
choreographic exploration. Intended for non-dance majors. 3 credits. 

DANC 101. BASIC BALLET 

Beginning ballet techniques based in traditional classical ballet vocabulary 
including complete barre work, centre barre, fundamental adagio and 
allegro movement and simple movement combinations. Intended for non-
majors. 1 credit. 

DANC 105. DANCE ESSENTIALS 

A seminar course, required of all freshman dance majors, covering dance 
department orientation, ballet and theater terminology, dance psychology, 
stage make-up, basic and injury prevention. 1 credit. 

DANC 106. MUSIC FOR DANCERS 

A survey of musical materials, forms, styles and instruments with discussion 
of and listening to major works from various periods of musical composition, 
with special emphasis on music written for, and used for dance. Basics of 
music theory as it relates to choreography. 3 credits. 

DANC 107. GLOBAL PERSP THROUGH YOGA 

A global perspective through a historical, philosophical, physiological, and 
practical introduction to yoga. Course work consists of lecture, discussion, 
class projects, research, active and mindful practices, and reflection essays. 
Students will explore the evolution and progression of yoga as a form of 
cultural expression, track yoga’s rising popularity in the west, and 
experience various practices and techniques. No pre-requisite. 3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 183 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


DANC 110. DANCE HISTORY 

The evolutionary study of dance. The course presents an in-depth study on 
the emergence of dance as a performing art form, focusing primarily on 
ballet and modern dance techniques, exploring the lives and work of major 
dance figures influencing the present state of the art form and referencing 
concurrent connections to cultural traditions and rituals. 3 credits. 

DANC 150. DANCE CONDITIONING 

This course focuses on cross training designed specifically to augment 
muscular strength, flexibility and endurance in dancers through the use of 
methodical progressive conditioning systems. Course work is based on 
somatic disciplines such as Pilates and yoga, as well as a variety of cross 
training techniques. 1 credit. 

DANC 151. MODERN I 

Beginning levels of modern dance technique from an eclectic perspective. 
Basic components of space, time and energy will be combined with dance 
improvisation techniques. Class work focuses on conditioning and 
anatomically correct dance technique. 2 credits. 

DANC 160. BASIC JAZZ 

Beginning jazz technique covering multiple genres and eras of jazz. 
Intended for non-majors. 1 credit. 

DANC 161. JAZZ I 

Beginning jazz dance technique including isolations, turns, jumps and 
combinations of jazz movement from various American jazz dance styles. 2 
credits. 

DANC 171. TAP I 

The course establishes the tap technique as a fundamental base for a 
professional approach to performing, teaching and choreographing this 
American based art form. Open to non-majors. 1 credit. 

DANC 175. LITURGICAL DANCE: CONCP & PRCP 

This course examines both past and present trends using dance in a 
liturgical context. The course covers historical, theological, and cultural 
milieus addressing and analyzing how dance is woven into the fabric of 
Roman Catholic liturgical celebrations. 3 credits. 

DANC 180. INTRO TO LABANOTATION 

Labanotation is a system of analyzing and recording movement. Theoretical 
concepts of symbolic representation are presented through movement 
experience and the reading and performance of dances from various genres 
and cultures. Intended as an elective course for dance majors. 3 credits. 

DANC 190. PRODUCTION PRACTICUM 

Production practicum is a faculty supervised experience that encompasses 
fundamental technical theatre practices. These include the set up, run and 
strike of productions, safety, lighting and sound, set and prop construction. 
Required of dance majors. 1 credit. 

DANC 200. INTRO TO ARTS ADMIN* 

An introduction to arts administration. Course approaches concepts from 
the unique perspective of the not-for-profit sector, specifically board 
development, long range planning, grant writing, marketing, public 
relations and budgeting. 3 credits. 

DANC 210. KINESIOLOGY 

The application of anatomical studies to the analysis of dance movement, 
technique, injury prevention and the treatment and rehabilitation of dance 
injuries. Prerequisite: Anatomy and Physiology. 3 credits. 

DANC 251. MODERN II 

Intermediate level of modern dance techniques from an eclectic perspective, 
expanding on material explored in Modern I with a more intensive course of 
study focusing on the mastery of a variety of styles through the study of 
dynamic clarity, athleticism, performance, anatomically correct dance 
technique, and increased elements of improvisation. Prerequisite: DANC 

151. 2 credits. 
DANC 261. JAZZ II 

Building on Jazz I this intermediate jazz dance technique course includes 
continued development of isolations, turns, jumps and combinations of jazz 
movement from various American jazz dance styles. Prerequisite: DANC 161. 
2 credit. 

DANC 280. CHOREOGRAPHY I 

Introduction, development and refinement in the art of making dances. A 
study of the fundamental elements and structure of dance composition. 
Class format is approached through discussion, observation, improvisation 
and choreographic assignments. 3 credits. 

DANC 301. MUSICAL THEATRE DANCE I 

Beginning-intermediate dance technique as it relates to Musical Theatre. 
This course focuses on the development of performance skills specific to 
musical theatre repertoire by integrating elements from jazz, ballet, modern 
and tap with an emphasis on executing anatomically sound dance 
technique. Prerequisites: DANC 161. 1 credit. 

DANC 310. PEDAGOGY 

Ballet based principles of teaching including methods and styles. Course 
work consists of lectures, discussions, fundamentals of music as it pertains 
to teaching dance, films, ballet notation including the use of French ballet 
terminology, class observations, teaching labs, pedagogical research and 
guest presentations. Requires practicum experiences. 3 credits. 

DANC 351. MODERN III 

This course builds on Modern II, offering an intermediate/ advanced level of 
modern dance technique from an eclectic perspective that expands on 
partnering and places emphasis on working at a pre-professional level to 
increase kinetic and anatomical precision, stamina, personal expression, 
style, artistry and technical virtuosity. Prerequisite: DANC 251. 2 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 184 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


DANC 380. CHOREOGRAPHY II 

A more extensive exploration into the art of making dances. This course 
further defines all choreographic elements culminating in a performance. 
Choreographers will produce work under the guidance of the instructor’s 
parameters. Prerequisite: DANC 280. 3 credits. 

DANC 385. ABROAD EXPERIENCE 

This course provides the advanced dance major with the opportunity to 
attend department approved international dance experiences. The student 
is required to document the experience and present the experience during 
the semester following his/her return. 3 credits. 

DANC 405. SENIOR PRO-SEMINAR 

Required of senior dance majors, this course outlines baccalaureate 
opportunities and professional development in the dance field including the 
audition process, development of resumes, audition photos, DVDs and 
websites, graduate program research and survival techniques unique to the 
dance field. 1 credit. 

DANC 408. PEDAGOGY II 

Advanced studies in both the philosophical and scientific principles and 
practices of teaching a dance technique class. In addition, studio 
management and curriculum development for dance in education programs 
(K-12) will be introduced. Coursework consists of lectures, discussions, 
teaching labs, pedagogical research and practicum. Prerequisite: DANC 310. 
3 credits. 

DANC 451. MODERN IV 

This course builds on Modern III, offering an advanced level of modern 
dance technique from an eclectic perspective that expands on partnering 
and places emphasis on working at a professional level to increase kinetic 
and anatomical precision, stamina, personal expression, style, artistry and 
technical virtuosity. Prerequisite: DANC 351. 2 credits. 

DANC 475. INTERNSHIP 

Pedagogy OR Performance Internship. 3 credits. 

DANC 480. CHOREOGRAPHY III 

Advanced dance composition using both concrete and abstract subject 
matter as references. Use of in-depth theatrical effects and various types of 
accompaniment will be explored. The final product will culminate in a 
performance. Prerequisite: DANC 380. 3 credits. 

DANC 485. SENIOR SEMINAR 

One or two semesters of faculty directed and mentored research that 
enhances and assesses a student's knowledge of a specific area of the dance 
field. B.A. degree candidates may choose any research topic, including one 
that would complement a dual major. The BFA degree requires that this 
course be a fourth semester of choreography. The course culminates in a 
senior thesis project that demonstrates breadth, depth, and explores ethical 
considerations revolving around the chosen area of research. An approved 
research proposal must be on file with the thesis director prior to 
registration. 3 credits. 

DANC 111-411. BALLET & POINTE II 

Intermediate ballet technique with emphasis placed on simple adagio and 
allegro combinations and stylistically building the body as a performing 
instrument within the vocabulary of classical and contemporary ballet and 
pointe. 3 credits. 

DANC 112 -412. BALLET & POINTE II 

Intermediate ballet technique with emphasis placed on simple adagio and 
allegro combinations and stylistically building the body as a performing 
instrument within the vocabulary of classical and contempoarary ballet and 
pointe. Offered the second semester within the academic year. 

DANC 115-445. POINTE & VARIATIONS II 

Fundamental pointe technique with emphasis placed on the use of proper 
physical placement, alignment, strength and stamina for stylistically build 
the body as a performing instrument with the vocabulary of classical ballet 
sur le pointe. Female variations from the classical repertoire will be 
introduced at the instructor’s discretion. Co-requisite: Ballet and Pointe II. 1 
credit. 

DANC 121-421. BALLET & POINTE III 

Intermediate advanced ballet techniques with emphasis on the expressive 
performance of classical ballet and pointe. Development of greater physical 
strength, stamina, flexibility and more complex movement vocabulary in 
classical and contemporary ballet. 3 credits. 

DANC 122-422. BALLET & POINTE III 

Intermediate advanced ballet techniques with emphasis on the expressive 
performance of classical ballet and pointe. Development of greater physical 
strength, stamina, flexibility and more complex movement vocabulary in 
classical and contemporary ballet. Offered the second semester of the year. 
3 credits. 

DANC 125-425. POINTE & VARIATIONS III 

Intermediate advanced pointe technique with grater emphasis placed on 
the expressive performance of classical ballet. Development of greater 
physical strength, stamina and more complex movement vocabulary sur le 
pointe. Female variations from the classical and contemporary repertoire 
will be introduced at the instructor’s discretion. Co-requisite: Ballet and 
Pointe III. 1 credit. 

DANC 138-438. PAS DE DEUX 

Partnering for classical ballet. Pas de deux from the classical repertoire will 
be introduced at the instructor’s discretion. (Pass/Fail). 1 credit. 

DANC 141-441. MEN'S TECHNIQUE 

Classical ballet technique addressing the performance dynamics specific to 
the male dancer including additional focus on strength, stamina, battu, 
turns and allegro. Male variations from the classical repertoire will be 
introduced at the instructor’s discretion. 1 credit. 

DANC 178-478. WINTER DANCE EXPERIENCE 

This course exposes dance majors to an intense workshop experience in the 
January semester including, but not limited to, a variety of technique 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 185 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


classes, repertoire, seminars and lectures. The student is required to 
document the experience and present elements of the experience at the end 
of the semester. 3 credits. 

DANC 191-491. COMPANY ENSEMBLE 

An introduction to traditional, neoclassical, contemporary and new 
choreographic repertoire set and developed in an atmosphere of 
professional standards with company class, rehearsal, lecture 
demonstrations, performance and touring venues. Pass/Fail. 1 credit. 

DANC 192-492. COMPANY ENSEMBLE 

An introduction to traditional, neoclassical, contemporary and new 
choreographic repertoire set and developed in an atmosphere of 
professional standards with company class, rehearsal, lecture 
demonstrations, performance and touring venues. Pass/Fail. Taken the 
second semester of an academic year. 1 credit. 

DANC 194-494. COMPANY ENSEMBLE ELECTIVE 

A fee-based elective alternative to the company ensemble course that 
provides an introduction to traditional, neoclassical, contemporary and new 
choreographic repertoire set and developed in an atmosphere of 
professional standards with company class, rehearsal, lecture 
demonstrations, performance and touring venues. This course will not fulfill 
requirements toward concentrations or graduation. Pass/Fail. 0 credits. 

DANC 231-431. BALLET & POINTE IV 

Advanced pre-professional ballet and pointe technique with emphasis on 
the refinement of artistry to a professional performance level. Continued 
development of greater physical strength, stamina and more complex 
movement vocabulary in classical and contemporary ballet. 3 credits. 

DANC 232-432. BALLET & POINTE IV 

Advanced pre-professional ballet and pointe technique with emphasis on 
the refinement of artistry to a professional performance level. Continued 
development of greater physical strength, stamina and more complex 
movement vocabulary in classical and contemporary ballet. Taken the 
second semester of an academic year. 3 credits. 

DANC 235-435. POINTE & VARIATIONS IV 

Advanced pointe technique with emphasis on the refinement of artistry to a 
professional performance level. Continued development of greater physical 
strength, stamina and more complex movement vocabulary sur le pointe. 
Female variations will be introduced at the instructor’s discretion. Co-
requisite: Ballet and Pointe IV. 1 credit. 

DANC 286-486. INDEPENDENT STUDY 

This course is designed to facilitate independent studies for students 
interested in pursuing research and/or projects beyond the curriculum. All 
independent studies must be approved by the dance chair, dean of the 
Hafenmaier College, and vice president for academic affairs. 1-3 credits. 

ECON 105. MACROECONOMICS 

A study of mixed capitalism in aggregate form designed to provide the 
student with a knowledge of the American economic system. Topics include 

the causes of recession, unemployment, inflation and the uses of fiscal and 
monetary policies. 3 credits. 

ECON 106. MICROECONOMICS 

A course emphasizing the economic activities of individual consumers and 
producers. Topic coverage includes demand-supply analysis, the costs of 
production and price and output determination by the market structure. 3 
credits. 

ECON 200. INTERNATIONAL ECONOMICS 

This course is designed to provide students with an understanding of the 
global economy especially in the area of international trade. Topics covered 
include classical and modern theories of international trade, theories of 
tariffs and non-tariff barriers, bi-lateral and multi-lateral trade negotiations, 
commercial policy of the U.S. and promotion of trade and growth. 
Prerequisite: ECON 106. 3 credits. 

ECON 250. ECONOMICS OF POVERTY 

This course introduces students to economic theories of poverty, ways to 
measure it (and the problems associated with these measures), and a 
description of the success and failures of public policies designed to curtail it. 
It features a blending of economic reasoning from theoretical and empirical 
perspectives, which will become part of the students’ toolkits in their further 
endeavors, and a critical comparison of the economics approach and 
Catholic social teaching. The students will come out of the course becoming 
critical and intelligent participants in public policy debates and learn to form 
their own policy recommendations based on their analysis. 3 credits. 

ECON 260. ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS 

The primary goal of this course is to enhance the student’s understanding 
and ability to critically assess contemporary environmental policy. It aims at 
equipping students with the economic methods and tools used to analyze 
environmental issues, combining theoretical analysis with discussions on 
specific environmental policies as applied to water and air pollution, energy 
issues, climate change, and human health issues. Analytical techniques for 
estimating the effects of proposed programs are examined. Strengths and 
weaknesses of benefit-cost analysis in the regulatory process are explored in 
the context of political economy. Current environmental policy is evaluated. 
3 credits. 

ECON 305. INTERMED MACROECONOMICS 

The goal of this course is to provide the student with a thorough 
understanding of the behavior of the economy and the likely effects of 
government stabilization policies on economic aggregate variables. Models 
that would determine aggregate output, interest rates, prices, inflation, and 
other aggregate variables such as fiscal and trade surpluses and deficits will 
be studied. Upon completion of the course, the student will be able to 
analyze conflicting views of business cycles, stabilization policy, and 
inflation-unemployment trade-offs. Prerequisite: ECON 105. 3 credits. 

ECON 306. INTERMED MICROECONOMICS 

This is an intermediate-level course dealing with the microeconomic theory 
of consumer and producer behavior. The course extends basic 
microeconomics concepts and theory to an intermediate level by 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 186 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


introducing more advanced mathematical and analytical techniques to 
concepts of consumer choice, profit maximization, and firm strategy in a 
variety of market structures. Particular attention is given to the theory of 
production and cost and to the effects of various market structures on 
resource allocation. The goal of the course is to provide the students with a 
solid analytical framework for analyzing microeconomic problems, which 
are crucial for success in upper division courses, business management, and 
public policy analysis. Prerequisite: ECON 106. 3 credits. 

ECON 320. ECON DEVELOP LATIN AMERICA 

This course provides a comprehensive yet accessible review of major 
economic and social issues faced by Latin American countries in the past and 
present, including balance of payments problems, stabilization, inflation, 
poverty, inequality, and the outcome of the latest economic reforms. Upon 
completion of the course, the student will demonstrate an understanding of 
the current conditions and prospects for Latin American economies, 
knowledge that would be valuable for students in any major with an 
interest in the region, (i.e., intelligence studies, sociology, and political 
sciences) and especially for business and international business students 
considering the risks and opportunities of investing in or working in Latin 
America. Prerequisite: ECON 105. 3 credits. 

ECON 406. MANAGERIAL ECONOMICS 

Managerial Economics focuses on the application of economic theory to 
managerial decision-making. It applies statistical and quantitative tools and 
the methodological approaches commonly used by economists to business 
decisions such as demand estimation, product pricing, profit maximizing 
level of output, resource management in the short and long run, market 
analysis, risk analysis and strategic competition. In this course, topics will be 
presented through the use of case studies that establish a situation in which 
managers must make key decisions about a firm and its products. 
Microeconomic principles such as supply and demand, elasticity, short-run 
and long-run shifts in resource allocation, diminishing returns, economies of 
scale, and pricing are applied in the analysis. Prerequisite: ECON 106, STAT 
135, Junior/Senior Standing. 3 credits. 

ECSP 305. FAMILY & COMMUNITY 

This course addresses the diversity found in today's school children in terms 
of race, culture, family structure, and the overarching needs of all children 
based on the works of Bronfenbrenner, Erikson, Maslow and other related 
theorists. Strategies to communicate with families and build a mutually 
supportive link between home and school will be addressed as well as 
community resources to assist with the needs of Pre-K to grade four 
students and their families. Prerequisites: EDEC 101, ESPE 101. 3 credits. 

ECSP 307. OBSERVATION & ASSESSMENT II 

This course provides further study into psycho-eductional assessment in 
education. Topics of study include: 1. Overview of basic considerations in 
assessment; 2. Assumptions underlying assessment and legal and ethical 
considerations in assessment; 3. Basic concepts of measurement, with a 
focus on descriptive statistics, quantification of test performance, norms, 
reliability, and validity; 4. Assessment of processes-intelligence, sensory 
acuity, oral language, perceptual-motor skills, and personality; 5. 
Assessment of skills-academic achievement, reading, mathematics, written 

language, adaptive behavior; 6. Applying assessment information to 
educational decision making. Prerequisite: EDEC 207. 3 credits. 

ECSP 475. CAPSTNE CLINICAL EARLY CHILDHOOD/SPECIAL EDUCATION 

This 12-week experience is designed to prepare the student to assume full 
teaching responsibilites in both an Early Childhood Pre K-4 and Special 
Education Pre K-8 classroom. A bi-weekly seminar is mandatory. This 
capstone experience is offered each year. 12 credits. 

EDEC 101. EARLY FOUNDATIONS 

This course introduces the student to the field of early childhood care and 
education. An overview of the field will include: history, developmental and 
learning theory and research; the social, emotional, physical, cognitive, 
language and creative development of young children; how early childhood 
professionals and early childhood programs meet the needs of young 
children and their families, as well as recognize the critical relationships that 
must be developed; types and organization of early childhood programs; 
characteristics of quality early care and education, including the critical 
importance of play and developmentally appropriate practices; current 
issues of the profession; cultural awareness; and the importance of ethical 
and professional conduct in the field. Activities (initial lesson planning), 
materials and standards used in the early childhood profession are 
introduced. 3 credits. 

EDEC 103. LANGUAGE & LITERACY I 

This course provides a solid foundation in the theoretical and pedagogical 
underpinnings of best practices that support language and literacy 
acquisition from birth through the early primary grades, with a special focus 
on how language contributes to literacy attainment. The use of children’s 
literature (picture book genre) in the language arts curriculum receives 
special attention. There is also a focus on the development of the skills of 
speaking, listening, writing, reading, and viewing, essential components of 
literacy. Students will utilize several checklists to evaluate children’s speech 
and language learning and conduct appropriate literacy assessments on 
children and programs. The importance of family literacy partnerships and 
the significance of meeting the needs of second language learners and 
bilingual children will be addressed. Knowledge regarding content, 
instructional strategies, ageappropriate materials, and technology for 
intentional teaching will be discussed and practiced. Completion of an 
embedded clinical experience is required. 3 credits. 

EDEC 105. HEALTH & WELLNESS 

This course focuses on promotion and maintenance of physical activity, 
health, safety, and nutrition of young children. It provides an overview of 
the basic principles and best practices of physical education, health, safety, 
and nutrition utilized in early childhood and primaryaged settings caring for 
children from birth to age 9. The course works is informed by the following: 
National Health Education Standards; National Association for Sport and 
Physical Education (NASPE) standards; NAEYC health and safety 
accreditation standards; Pennsylvania Learning Standards; DPW regulations. 
Topics covered include: Physical-Education: recognition of the importance of 
physical education and the goal of life-long physical fitness; knowledge 
about and ability to provide physical education and movement activities 
aimed at promoting increased motor development and competence-use of 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 187 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


standards, lesson and activity planning; strategies used to encourage 
children and families to foster life-long habits of health and wellbeing; the 
impact of inactivity on all domains of development; and cooperative versus 
competitive games and the value of both. Health and Safety: learning about 
the critical importance of health and safety issues in care and education 
facilities; obtaining knowledge about common childhood illnesses and 
communicable diseases; preventive health and safety measures; record 
keeping, supervision and reporting (including mandated child abuse 
reporting); arrangement and maintenance of indoor and outdoor 
equipment; knowledge about basic first aid and emergency procedures; and 
identification of dangers specific to developmental stages and individual 
needs. Nutrition: developing an understanding of the use of the food 
pyramid for identifying the nutritional needs of young children and for 
planning nutritional and culturally sensitive snacks and meals; discussing 
nutrition related issues such as obesity, diabetes, and fatty liver disease. 3 
credits. 

EDEC 201. READING METHODS 

This course is a research-based, practical course designed to enable the early 
childhood education major to obtain the skills needed to effectively teach 
reading in grades Pre-K to 4. In addition to giving the pre-service teacher 
experience through readings, writing intensive activities, class discussion, 
hands on activities, technology exposure, demonstration lessons and 
practicums, the students will demonstrate increased proficiency in their own 
reading skills, including knowledge of phonic generalizations. Clinical 
required. Prerequisites: EDEC 101, EDEC 103, ESPE 101. 4 credits. 

EDEC 203. LANGUAGE & LITERACY II 

This course is a research-based, practical course designed to enable the early 
childhood education major to obtain the skills needed to effectively teach 
the language arts curriculum in grades K to 4. In addition to giving the preservice 
teacher experience through readings, writing intensive activities, 
class discussion, hands-on activities, technology exposure, demonstration 
lessons and clinicals, the students will demonstrate increased proficiency in 
their own language arts skills. The focus of this course is to help the student 
become proficient in the instruction of language arts (reading, writing, 
speaking, listening, viewing and visually representing), using an integrated 
approach to teaching the principal curricular skills of reading, writing, 
listening, speaking, spelling, grammar, and handwriting. Completion of 
embedded clinical experience is required. Prerequisites: EDEC 101, EDEC 103, 
EDEC 201, ESPE 101. 4 credits. 

EDEC 205. MATH METHODS 

This course is designed to review mathematical content, present and explore 
methodology and instructional materials for a contemporary elementary 
mathematics program. It stresses the use of knowledge obtained from 
learning theory, various selecting, preparing, organizing and finally 
presenting mathematical content for elementary children. Completion of 
embedded clinical experience is required. Prerequisite: ESPE 101. 4 credits. 

EDEC 207. OBSERVATION & ASSESSMENT 

This course focuses on the importance of assessment that is done through 
the techniques of observation, recording and documentation. Authentic 
assessment, the documentation of children’s learning in naturalistic settings 

via non-numeric instruments, will be stressed. Students will learn about 
different methods and tools for recording observations as they complete a 
clinical in a local early childhood program. Using observations as a method 
of understanding and assessing children’s development and learning, as 
well as transforming the collected data into curricula and individual 
education plans, will be addressed. The importance of professional ethical 
behavior will also be a topic of discussion. Completion of embedded clinical 
experience is required. Prerequisites: EDEC 101, EDEC 103, ESPE 101. 3 
credits. 

EDEC 301. EARLY CHILDHOOD METHODS 

This course enhances the student’s understanding of developmentally 
appropriate curriculum, focusing specifically on curricula which provide for 
all areas of a young children’s development (3-7), including the physical, 
intellectual, emotional, social, and linguistic domains. Students will 
examine the critical role of play—a dynamic, active, and constructive 
behavior—and determine that it is an essential and integral part of 
children’s learning across all ages, domains, and cultures and therefore must 
be part of every early childhood curricula. Part of the course work will enable 
students to evaluate the theory and research integral to a variety of 
curriculum approaches, analyze early childhood curriculum models, and 
identify the historical, social and cultural influences on curriculum. 
Emergent curriculum, play-based curriculum, integrated curriculum across 
content areas, theme planning versus the project approach, and antibias/
multicultural curriculum will be examined. By studying the materials 
and teaching strategies used in a variety of content areas pre-service 
teachers will discover how children represent their understanding through 
language, dramatic play, art, blocks, sand and water, and manipulatives. 
Focus will be on preschool, kindergarten and first grade curricula 
development and implementation. Clinical Required. Prerequisites: EDEC 
101, EDEC 103, EDEC 105, ESPE 101. 4 credits. 

EDEC 401. INTEGRATED METHODS 

This course examines attitudes and skills needed to teach the major content 
areas, specifically emphasizing social studies and science integrated using a 
model of inquiry and aesthetic education. Pre-service teachers will be 
involved in learning experiences that prepare them to facilitate content in a 
Pre-K to grade 4 setting that will involve multiple subjects, multiple 
teachers, multiple students learning together, and multiple facets of 
technology emphasizing inquiry based interdisciplinary instruction and 
learning. Hands-on strategies, teaching materials, and organization of 
lessons into units are explored. Clinical Required. Corequisites: EDEC 473, 
EDEC 474. 4 credits. 

EDEC 473. SYSTEMS,POLICIES&PRACTICES 

This seminar course will help candidates learn to identify with and conduct 
themselves as members of profession, with an emphasis on familiarizing 
candidates with the current practices/topics in the field, areas of 
professionalism, and family/community collaboration partnerships. 
Candidates will be encouraged to engage and interact with instructor and 
peers to discuss their field experiences, practical problems in the classroom, 
and reflect on how their classroom encounters relate to early development 
and learning theory, subject matter content, pedagogy, assessment, as well 
as their current coursework and overall education program goals. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 188 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


Candidates are expected to be active participants in assigned readings, 
questioning, and other discussions/ debates. Candidates will enroll in this 
seminar concurrent with EDEC 474. 2 credits. 

EDEC 474. CLINICAL I ERLY CHLD PRK-4 

A pre-Capstone Clinical program, in which the student observes the 
classroom teacher, tutors individual children, supervises and teaches 
children in small and large group settings, and assists the teacher in 
appropriate teaching/ learning experiences in grades Pre-K to 4. In addition 
to the classroom experience, the student will demonstrate proficiency of 
planning, writing, and implementing lesson plans and develop skills in 
classroom organization and management techniques. A focus on the 
Pennsylvania Academic Standards in health, safety and physical education 
will also be emphasized. Prerequisites: Unconditional acceptance into the 
Education Department is required. Corequisite: EDEC 473. 4 credits. 

EDEC 475. CAPSTNE CLINIC ERLY CH PK4 

This 12-week experience is designed to prepare the student to assume full 
teaching responsibilities in an Early Childhood classroom. A bi-weekly 
seminar is mandatory. Offered every year. 12 credits. 

EDUC 210. COMPARATIVE ISSUES IN EDUC 

The emphasis of this course is to help students develop into teachers who 
become reflective practitioners. A case study approach, seminar-type 
discussion, and numerous writing assignments will be used to involve 
students in the day-to-day activities that are part of teaching practice. The 
course will explore the social, cultural, political, historical, and philosophical 
contexts of schools, and use the perspective gained from this study to 
consider present day educational issues. Students will begin construction of 
their teaching portfolio by writing a statement of their philosophy of 
education. An embedded clinical experience during regular school hours is 
required. Prerequisites: ESPE 101, Sophomore level and above. Must have 
state mandated clearances Acts 34,114, and 151. 3 credits. 

EDUC 222. AESTHETIC EDUCATION 

This course is designed to help students understand the world in new ways 
through an experiential exploration of the arts. Students will consider the 
meaning of “aesthetic education” through an empirical examination of the 
arts and their relationship with education. Utilizing an approach developed 
by the Lincoln Center Institute for the Arts in Education (LCI), students will 
be immersed in a combination of well thought-out observations and 
analyses of specific works of art through hands-on exploratory activities 
designed by arts and education faculty. The LCI approach advocates that 
through these art making journeys into dance, music, theater, and the visual 
arts, students will be encouraged to draw upon prior perceptions to build 
new insights and further their comprehension of the work of art. This 
inquiry-based practice which encourages students to interact, question, 
reflect, observe, notice, and analyze art to develop a new perspective-an 
aesthetic awareness, integral to all forms of education and life itself. 
Through discussion and dialogue of these shared aesthetic experiences, 
students will develop an understanding of “aesthetic education” as a 
process of building knowledge which incorporates the elements of “art” 
itself, as well as incorporating the arts as a means for teaching other 
branches of learning. 3 credits. 

EDUC 474. CLINICAL SECONDARY EDUC 

This course is designed to provide secondary students with first-hand 
teaching experiences in middle and/ or high school classrooms. Students 
work with mentor teachers in their content areas. During this time they 
serve as apprentices, assisting the classroom teacher and gradually move 
from a role of observer to roles of tutor, small group leader, and large group 
instructor. Interns work at their school sites each Wednesday and Friday 
during the semester for a total of 60 hours. Each Monday morning the 
interns participate in a campus seminar that addresses research-based 
instructional strategies and inclusive classroom practices. This course must 
be taken the semester immediately prior to student teaching. 3 credits. 

EDUC 475. CAPSTONE CLINICAL K-12 

This 12-week capstone experience is designed to prepare the pre-service 
teacher to assume full teaching responsibilities in a secondary classroom. 
Students will normally teach at both the junior and senior high school levels. 
A bi-weekly seminar is mandatory. 12 credits. 

ELL 301. SUPPORTING LIT ENG LNG LRN* 

This course introduces the structure of the English language as a background 
for exploring the development of literacy for English language learners 
(ELLs) across disciplines. It prepares teacher candidates to support, 
accommodate and coach ELLs in literacy strategies, including the use of 
assistive technologies relevant to content area subjects. The course partially 
satisfies competencies for the PDE ESL Program Specialist Certification. 
Students will be required to complete field experiences and classroom 
activities that enable them to reflect on their own belief systems, practices, 
and educational experiences. 3 credits. 

ELL 400. ISSUES TCH ENG SECOND LANG* 

This course explores instructional techniques to help ELLs develop L2 literacy 
and content knowledge. It prepares teacher candidates to develop ELL 
instruction and assessment opportunities; to apply appropriate testing 
practices for English language learners by addressing state-allowed testing 
accommodations, using multiple assessment resources and measures; and 
to analyze educational data from various ELL groups. The course partially 
satisfies competencies for the PDE ESL Program Specialist Certification. 
Students will be required to complete field experiences and classroom 
activities that enable them to reflect on their own belief systems, practices, 
and educational experiences. 3 credits. 

ELL 405. PROF&PROG DEVELOP FOR ELL* 

This course explores the national, state and local requirements and their 
effects on ELL instruction, assessment and program implementation; 
investigates the importance of collaboration with family, community, 
content instructors and administrators for the educational benefit of ELLs; 
and helps candidates plan for long-term growth and personal professional 
development through participation in professional organization and action 
research. 3 credits. 

ELL 500. ISSUES TCH ENG SECOND LANG* 

This course explores instructional techniques to help ELLs develop L2 literacy 
and content knowledge. It prepares teacher candidates to develop ELL 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 189 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


instruction and assessment opportunities; to apply appropriate testing 
practices for English language learners by addressing state-allowed testing 
accommodations, using multiple assessment resources and measures; and 
to analyze educational data from various ELL groups. The course partially 
satisfies competencies for the PDE ESL Program Specialist Certification. 
Students will be required to complete field experiences and classroom 
activities that enable them to reflect on their own belief systems, practices, 
and educational experiences. Students registered in the graduate section of 
the course will have an additional research/practical application project 
which demonstrates an in-depth, integrated understanding of the content 
at the graduate level. 3 credits. 

ELL 505. PROF & PROG DEVELOP FOR ELL* 

This course explores the national, state, and local requirements and their 
effects on ELL instruction, assessment, and program implementation; 
investigates the importance of collaboration with family, community, 
content instructors, and administrators for the educational benefit of ELLs; 
and helps candidates plan for long-term growth and personal professional 
development through participation in professional organization and action 
research. Students registered in the graduate section of the course will 
have an additional research/practical application project which 
demonstrates an in-depth, integrated understanding of the content at the 
graduate level. 3 credits. 

ELL 515. SUPPORTING LIT ENG LNG LRN* 

This course introduces teacher candidates to the structure of the English 
language as a background for exploring the development of literacy for 
English language learners (ELLs) across disciplines. It prepares teacher 
candidates to support, accommodate and coach ELLs in literacy strategies, 
including the use of assistive technologies relevant to content area subjects. 
The course partially satisfies competencies for the ESL Program Specialist 
Certification. Students will be required to complete field experiences and 
classroom activities that enable them to reflect on their own belief systems, 
practices, and educational experiences. Students registered in the graduate 
section of the course will have an additional research/practical application 
project which demonstrates an in-depth, integrated understanding of the 
content at the graduate level. 3 credits. 

ENG 140. WESTERN CLASSICS 

A study of major writers of the Western World from ancient to modern 
times, with attention given to their individual achievement and to their 
contribution to Western literary and cultural development. 3 credits. 

ENG 144. WORLD LITERATURE AND GLOBAL ISSUES 

An opportunity to read deeply into literary traditions and to make 
connections and distinctions between different traditions in non-western 
literatures, including selections from South America, the Caribbean, Africa, 
the Middle East, India and Asia. 3 credits. 

ENG 150. BRITISH CLASSICS 

A study of major writers in the history of England, with attention given to 
their individual achievement and to contributions to English literary and 
cultural development. Authors may include Chaucer, Shakespeare, Milton, 
Wordsworth, Austen and others. 3 credits. 

ENG 155. AMERICAN CLASSICS 

A survey of major writers, established within the traditional canon of 
American literature, with attention given to their individual achievement 
and contribution to American literary and cultural development. Authors 
may include Franklin, Emerson, Dickinson, Hawthorne, Twain, Frost, 
Hemingway and others. 3 credits. 

ENG 190. INTRO TO FILM 

Introduction to the art, technology, and language of film. Students will learn 
basic cinematic techniques and structures, the fundamentals of film 
production, and an overview of cinematic history. 3 credits. 

ENG 200. LITERARY STUDIES 

This course focuses on the analysis and interpretation of various literary 
genres, exploring how language is used to enlighten, influence, and 
entertain readers. This class will involve reading, writing, and researching, 
as well as analyzing the course themes of identity, gender and class in a 
number of texts. 3 credits. 

ENG 205. INTRO TO ENGLISH MAJOR 

Introduces students to the discipline of English studies, with emphasis on 
close reading, major genres, and critical/theoretical approaches. Readings 
will be drawn from a range of literary periods and traditions. 3 credits. 

ENG 210. FILM STUDIES 

Focuses on a single topic and examines how film has been used to create 
different styles of narrative. The topics vary and may include courses such as 
Shakespeare on Film, Studies in Detective Fiction, Adaptations of Jane 
Austen, Ecocinema, and the Hollywood Musical, among others. 3 credits. 

ENG 214. INTRO TO PROFESSIONAL WRITING 

The class is designed to deepen students’ understanding of the writing 
situation—audience and purpose—within the context of other 
professional activities. It is designed to enable students to write accurately 
and thoughtfully about a subject while creating documents that solve 
problems and improve situations through effective communication. 3 
credits. 

ENG 215. AMERICAN LITERATURE I 

First in a two-course sequence that surveys the history of American 
literature from its beginnings to the present. Students will read a variety of 
texts (essays, autobiographies, poems, plays, short stories and/or novels) 
from period to 1865 to develop an understanding of the importance of these 
texts, as well as to learn about the historical and cultural contexts in which 
they were produced. 3 credits. 

ENG 216. AMERICAN LITERATURE II 

Second in a two-course sequence that surveys the history of American 
Literature from 1865 to the present. Students will read a variety of texts 
(essays, autobiographies, poems, plays, short stories and/or 
novels)American Realism, Modernism and Postmodernism. 3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 190 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


ENG 217. BRITISH LITERATURE I 

First in a two-course survey of British literature from its beginnings to the 
present. The class covers a variety of texts from the Old English period to the 
18th Century, with emphasis on the major historical and cultural periods: 
Medieval, the English Renaissance, Restoration and the 18th Century. 3 
credits. 

ENG 218. BRITISH LITERATURE II 

Second in a two-course survey of British literature from its beginnings to the 
present. The class covers a variety of texts from the 19th century to the 
present, with emphasis on the major historical and cultural periods: 
Romanticism, Victorianism, Modernism and Postmodernism. 3 credits. 

ENG 220. MEDIEVAL LITERATURE 

A study of representative prose and poetry of Old English and Middle English 
from Beowulf to Chaucer. Included are Old English heroic poems, elegies, 
gnomic verses and riddles, and works such as Sir Gawain and the Green 
Knight. 3 credits. 

ENG 224. ENGLISH RENAISSANCE 

A study in the literary milieu in England from the early 1500s to 1600 with 
authors such as Wyatt, Surrey, Shakespeare and Milton. 3 credits. 

ENG 228. RESTORATION AND 18TH CENTURY LIT 

A comparative study of the historical, cultural, and literary movements 
underpinning the development and influences of the Neoclassical Age in 
England, focusing on such authors as Dryden, Congreve, Pope, Haywood and 
Johnson. 3 credits. 

ENG 230. BRITISH ROMANTICISM 

A close examination of some of the major ideas and influences in British and 
continental Romanticism, with special emphasis on the development of 
Romantic literary theory through the works of such writers as Goethe, 
Hoffman, Coleridge, Wordsworth, Shelley and Keats. 3 credits. 

ENG 234. VICTORIAN LITERATURE 

A comparative examination of the historical and literary movements of the 
British Victorian period. The study covers a range of poetry and prose by 
authors such as Tennyson, Arnold, the Brownings and Rossetti. 3 credits. 

ENG 238. BRITISH/IRISH MODERNISM 

The course examines modernist poetry, fiction, and drama written in 
England, Wales, Ireland and Scotland through the works of such writers as 
Hardy, Joyce, Woolf, Yeats, Synge, Auden, Shaw, Forster, as well as a more 
recent group that includes Greene, Murdock, Durrell, Stoppard, Larkin, 
O'Brien and Beckett. 3 credits. 

ENG 251. EARLY AMERICAN LITERATURE 

A study designed to broaden a student's sense of the roots of the literary 
tradition of the U.S from its origins to the 1820s. Works include those of 
16th century Spanish explorers, Native American tales, Puritan New England 
writers, and the literature of the American Revolution. 3 credits. 

ENG 253. AMERICAN RENAISSANCE 

Between 1820 and 1865, American literature came of age with the period's 
extraordinary cultural and social upheavals. A study of the most important 
writers of the period, such as Poe, Emerson, Douglass, Hawthorne, Melville, 
Thoreau, Whitman and Dickinson. 3 credits. 

ENG 261. AMERICAN REALISM 

A study of the regional voices and the literary movements of realism, 
including local color and naturalism, that marked the years following the 
American Civil War through the works of such writers as Davis, Jewett, 
Chopin, Gilman, Chesnutt, Howells, James, Twain and Crane. 3 credits. 

ENG 263. AMERICAN MODERNISM 

A study of the modernists writing from 1910 to 1945, along with the writers 
of the Harlem Renaissance and of the 1930s Depression. Poets include Frost, 
Eliot, Pound, Williams, Stevens, H.D., Moore, Hughes, and fiction writers 
such as Faulkner, Cather, Hemingway, Fitzgerald and Hurston. 3 credits. 

ENG 225. INDEPENDENT STUDY 

Study of a focused area in literature, writing, or pedagogy initiated by the 
student and under the direction of a faculty mentor. Independent studies 
are offered only in special circumstances and must be approved by the 
department director in the term prior to course enrollment. Junior/Senior. 3 
credits. 

ENG 245. SCRIPT ANALYSIS 

An exploration of dramatic literature with a concentration in play analysis. 3 
credits. 

ENG 280. INTRO TO CREATIVE WRITING 

An examination of the fundamentals essential in the art of fiction and 
poetry writing through the reading and discussion of work by contemporary 
writers and through the development and critiquing of students’ own 
writing in a workshop setting. 3 credits. 

ENG 290. HISTORY OF MUSICAL THEATRE 

A special topics course that explores a theme, period, movement or genre in 
theatre history through the reading and discussion of representative plays 
and their production. 3 credits. 

ENG 292. FILM NARRATIVE & THEORY 

An intermediate course in film studies, grounding students in major 
approaches to film theory and criticism (e.g., psychoanalysis, gender 
studies, cultural studies) and emphasizing the structure of film as narrative 
art. The class will reinforce the language of cinematography, editing, sound, 
performance and genre. 3 credits. 

ENG 310. ADVANCED COMPOSITION 

A close examination of and experience in the theory and practice of the 
essay and other forms of nonfiction prose writing. Major emphasis is on 
student production of original, in-depth examples of the writing forms 
studied. 3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 191 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


ENG 311. EDITING AND STYLE 

Students will learn practical editing techniques, as well as the rhetorical 
factors (e.g., legibility, readability, layout, and integration of text/images) 
that contribute to the effectiveness and usability of print documents. 
Students will work on individual projects and engage in collaborative 
exercises intended to sharpen their teamwork, editing, writing, and 
audience-awareness skills and learn to communicate with the authors of 
texts. This class may use Lumen as a practical workshop. 3 credits. 

ENG 312. PROFESSIONAL WRITING SEM 

An in-depth study of writing practices applicable to a variety of professional 
writing situations. Students evaluate and create strategies for adjusting to 
writing requirements in various work environments. Study includes 
rhetorical theory, audience analysis, and the process of writing professional 
documents. 3 credits. 

ENG 314. TCH WRITING: PEDAGOGY & PRAC 

An examination of the theories and methods of writing instruction. Major 
emphasis is on current composition research and pedagogy, including 
theories of language. 3 credits. 

ENG 316. ORAL INTERPRETATION 

An intensive study in the theory and practice of producing oral 
interpretation of texts. Emphasis is placed on student experiences in analysis 
and oral performance of various genres. 3 credits. 

ENG 317. PROFESSIONAL AND PUBLIC DISCOURSE 

In this course, students will focus on effective, professional public discourse. 
Drawing on strategies of rhetorical criticism, students will gain an 
understanding of the persuasive value of style, arrangement, and delivery of 
public debate and presentation. 3 
credits. 

ENG 318. APPLIED LINGUISTICS 

A close examination of current theories of language, including language 
acquisition, second language learning, sociolinguistics and 
psycholinguistics. Emphasis is on applying theories to English and/or foreign 
language classrooms. 3 credits. 

ENG 325. INDEPENDENT STUDY 

Study of a focused area in literature, writing or pedagogy initiated by the 
student and under the direction of a faculty mentor. Independent studies 
are offered only in special circumstances and must be approved by the 
department director in the term prior to course enrollment. Junior/Seniors. 
3 credits. 

ENG 328. SPECIAL TOPICS IN LIT 

The special topics seminars invite students to engage in an intensive study 
of a particular theme, historical moment, author or interdisciplinary topic. 
Drawn from American, British or European traditions, courses might include 
Writing and the Environment or Existentialism and Literature. Students may 
take multiple seminar topics under this course number. 1-3 credits. 

ENG 330. THE ENGLISH DRAMA 

A seminar on the development of English drama as a unique literary 
experience. A study of dramatic texts from the medieval to contemporary 
eras, the course examines drama as a reflection of literary and cultural 
expressions both within and beyond mainstream British tradition. 3 credits. 

ENG 332. THE ENGLISH NOVEL 

A seminar on the development of the novel as a literary genre. An 
introduction to 18th century narrative theory provides the basis for 
understanding later texts in Romantic, Victorian, Modernist and 
Postmodernist traditions, focusing on the novels of Defoe, Dickens, Emily 
Bronte, Joyce and others. 3 credits. 

ENG 338. SEMINAR IN BRITISH LIT 

The Seminar in British Literature invites students to engage in an intensive 
study of a particular theme, historical moment, genre, or author in the 
British literary tradition. Courses might include Travel Writing, Gothic 
Fiction, Detective Fiction, Irish Literature, or a major author course. Students 
may take multiple seminar topics under this course number. 3 credits. 

ENG 334. SHAKESPEARE 

A study of Shakespeare's concepts of tragedy and comedy through a careful 
analysis of the great tragedies and several comedies and histories. 3 credits. 

ENG 351. SOUTHERN LITERATURE 

A seminar exploring issues of race, class, politics and gender from the 
unique perspective of writers of the American South, with special attention 
to literature of the Southern “renaissance,” including William Faulkner, 
Tennessee Williams, Zora Neale Hurston and Flannery O’Connor, as well as 
writers of the postmodern South, such as Ernest Gaines, Walker Percy, 
Bobbie Ann Mason and Alice Walker. 3 credits. 

ENG 353. AMER COUNTER CULT:FICTION 

A seminar on the development of American counterculture fiction, focusing 
on the beats, the cultural revolution, psychedelic consciousness, and literary 
slapstick as social commentary. This course will examine works by writers 
such as Jack Kerouac, Ken Kesey, Tom Wolfe, Kurt Vonnegut, Hunter 
Thompson, Richard Brautigan and Thomas Pynchon. 3 credits. 

ENG 356. MODERN DRAMA 

Intensive study of major contemporary plays, paying particular attention to 
the theatrical, literary and cultural contexts of individual works. 3 credits. 

ENG 358. SEM IN AMERICAN LIT 

The seminar in American Literature invites students to engage in an 
intensive study of a particular theme, historical moment or author in the 
American literary tradition. Courses might include Literature of the Jazz Age, 
Native American Literature, or a major author course. Students may take 
multiple seminar topics under this course number. 3 credits. 

ENG 362. CONTEMPORARY POETRY 

Intensive study of major contemporary poets and movements. The seminar 
emphasizes poets such as Olson, Plath, Snyder, Harper and Ondaatje. Focus 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 192 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


includes Black Mountain, Beat, confessional and postmodern poetry. 3 
credits. 

ENG 364. POSTMODERN LITERATURE 

A study of the critical ideas and trends in literary postmodernism, including 
such movements as ecofeminism, cyberpunk, and L-A-N-G-U-A-G-E poetics. 
Attention is given to the problematic definition in postmodern theory, 
focusing on the works of such authors as William Gibson, Gary Snyder, 
Ursula Le Guin and Edward Dorn. 3 credits. 

ENG 370. AFRICAN-AMERICAN LIT 

A study of the contributions of African-American writers to the cultural and 
aesthetic inheritance of modern literature through popular authors as 
Gwendolyn Brooks, Alice Walker, Amiri Baraka (LeRoi Jones), Richard 
Wright, Ralph Ellison and Maya Angelou. 3 credits. 

ENG 374. WOMEN AND LITERATURE 

Examination of women writers in 19th-20th century English literature and 
feminist literary theory. Explores previously neglected women writers and 
affirms their contributions to the literary tradition. Includes writers such as 
Kate Chopin and Toni Morrison. 3 credits. 

ENG 378. SEM IN MULTICULTURAL LIT 

This seminar invites students to engage in an intensive study of 
multicultural literature. Courses might include Postcolonial, Native 
American, Middle Eastern, African or Latino Literature. Students may take 
multiple seminar topics under this course number. 3 credits. 

ENG 380. CREATIVE WRITING:POETRY 

Further development of skills studied in Introduction to Creative Writing 
with exclusive emphasis on poetry. Prerequisite: ENG 280. 3 credits. 

ENG 384. CREATIVE WRITING: FICTION 

Further development of skills studied in Introduction to Creative Writing 
with exclusive emphasis on fiction. Prerequisite: ENG 280. 3 credits. 

ENG 391. LITERARY THEORY&CRITICISM 

An in-depth study of critical and theoretical approaches to literature, with 
an emphasis on the development of theories of literature from classicism to 
contemporary cognitive poetics. 3 credits. 

ENG 425. INDEPENDENT STUDY 

Study of a focused area in literature, writing or pedagogy initiated by the 
student and under the direction of a faculty mentor. Independent studies 
are offered only in special circumstances and must be approved by the 
department director in the term prior to course enrollment. Juniors/Seniors. 
3 credits. 

ENG 475. ENGLISH INTERNSHIP 

An off-campus, non-classroom learning experience directly related to 
English and making use of skills acquired in the pursuit of an English major. 
Juniors/Seniors. 1-3 credits. 

ENG 490. SENIOR ENGLISH PROJECT 

Each English major takes this seminar and works under the direction of a 
faculty mentor to prepare a significant written project in literary scholarship, 
professional/technical writing or creative writing. 3 credits. 

ENG 473. ENGLISH INTERNSHIP 

Internships allows for non-credit bearing practical experience for students 
related to their major. 100 hours of field placement are required. A 473 
Internship cannot take the place of a required internship. Contact the Career 
Development Center for additional details. Prerequisite: By permission from 
department. 3 credits. 

ENVS 105. INTRODUCTION TO ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES 

An interdisciplinary course that examines local, national and global 
environmental problems from diverse perspectives. The concept of 
environmental sustainability is emphasized to illustrate its utility to frame 
individual and societal actions for advancing a more environmentally just 
and healthy world in the twenty-first century. The social, political and 
economic forces that complicate the resolution of environmental problems 
are highlighted, as are historical events and the centuries-old heritage of 
American environmental literature. 3 credits. 

ENVS 474. ENVIRONMENTAL PRACTICUM 

Practical off-campus experience in a consulting company, non-profit 
organization, or governmental agency. Students carry out field, laboratory, 
or other tasks appropriate for a professional environmental scientist. In 
addition to routine work responsibilities, participants are expected to 
complete an independent project involving data analysis and prepare a 
formal written report on the experience. 1-3 credits. 

ENVS 475. ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE INTERNSHIP 

Completed through a environmentally-focused government agency, 
environmental consulting company or nonprofit institution, the 
environmental science internship offers students an opportunity to acquire 
field, laboratory or project management experience. Internships must be 
approved by the advisor and one of the co-chairs of the program. 3 credits. 

ENVS 490. ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE THESIS 

Directed field and/or laboratory research on a specific environmental 
problem that leads to the completion of an oral presentation and formal 
written work. The research experience emphasizes the use of primary 
sources as well as a scientifically rigorous field or laboratory study. All thesis 
projects must be approved by the student’s primary and secondary advisors 
before work commences. 

ESPE 101. PSYC OF DIVERSE LEARNERS 

This course provides an overview of the psychology of learning, motivation, 
growth and development, personality dynamics, and social adjustment with 
emphasis on the diversity of learners in today’s classrooms. 3 credits. 

ESPE 201. INCLUSIVE PRAC PRE K-8 

This course addresses issues related to the inclusion of students with 
disabilities into general education classrooms and programs through policy, 
research, and practice. Participants will be given an opportunity to explore 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 193 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


and develop their personal philosophy toward inclusion and collaboration in 
schools and communities. Participants will learn tools for collaboration, 
instructional strategies, assessment, and curriculum design, which will 
allow them to educate students with exceptionalities in the general 
education classroom dealing with grades Pre-K through 8. Completion of 
embedded clinical experience required. Prerequisite: ESPE 101. 3 credits. 

ESPE 203. BEHAVIOR THEORIES&PRAC 

This course focuses on the provision of support to students with emotional 
and behavior needs in academic settings. The central theme will focus on 
the development of assessment-based interventions that address 
interfering behavior, academic learning problems, and/or difficulties in 
interpersonal relationships. Evidence-based approaches as well as practices 
required by the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) will be 
emphasized. Completion of embedded clinical experience required. 
Prerequisite: ESPE 101. 3 credits. 

ESPE 301. SUPPORTING LIT PRE K-8 

This course prepares teacher candidates to explore the integration of literacy 
across all disciplines and to develop the idea that all teachers teach literacy. 
It prepares teacher candidates to support, accommodate, and coach 
students with disabilities in particular literacy strategies, including the use 
of assistive technologies relevant to content area subjects in grades Pre-K 
through 8. Prerequisite: ESPE 101. 3 credits. 

ESPE 305. LOW INCIDENCE DISABILITIES 

This course focuses on research-based methods of instruction for students 
with low incidence disabilities in basic communication, mobility, sensory, 
and social skills, as well as academic skills (especially literacy and general 
education curricular access). Our approach to provision of services for these 
students is grounded in the broader context of expanding students’ valued 
roles in classrooms, schools, and communities, while teaching skills that will 
enhance personal competence and life quality today and in the future. An 
introduction to augmentative and alternative communication (AAC) and 
assistive technology (AT) is also addressed in this course. Prerequisites: ESPE 
101, ESPE 201, or ESPE 202, ESPE 301, or ESPE 302. 3 credits. 

ESPE 306. LOW INCIDENCE DISABILITIES: CLINICAL 

A supervised field experience during which students will participate in 
special education programs by implementing teacher-led, small group and 
individual student instruction. Placement will include public schools and 
other agencies serving children with low incidence disabilities. Corequisite: 
ESPE 305. 1 credit. 

ESPE 307. HIGH INCIDENCE DISABILITIES 

This course focuses on the practical application of research-based 
instructional methods for students with high incidence disabilities. Students 
enrolled in this course will be expected to: (a) demonstrate knowledge of 
the theoretical frameworks underlying instructional practices that have 
been shown to be effective for students with mild disabilities, (b) develop 
and use appropriate assessment tools for instructional decision-making, (c) 
develop appropriate instructional lessons based on assessment information 
and models of effective instruction, and (d) generate appropriate 
modifications and adaptations for content-area curricular materials. 

Prerequisites: ESPE 101, ESPE 201, or ESPE 202, ESPE 301, or ESPE 302. 3 
credits. 

ESPE 308. HIGH INCIDENCE DISABILITIES: CLINICAL 

A supervised field experience during which students participate in special 
education programs by implementing teacher-led, small group and 
individual student instruction. Placement will include public schools and 
other agencies serving children with high incidence disabilities. Corequisite: 
ESPE 307. 1 credit. 

FASH 100. PUBLIC SPKG FASH INDUSTRY 

This course is designed as an introduction to public speaking, oral 
presentations, and effective communication. It will emphasize the 
importance of public speaking throughout higher education and into the 
career world. Students will learn about and practice several different types 
of presentations. Topics of the presentations in this course will relate directly 
to current events and controversial topics in the fashion industry. 2 credits. 

FASH 110. INTRO FASHION INDUSTRY 

This course introduces the fundamentals of fashion and the basic principles 
that govern fashion evolution, organization, and merchandising. Students 
will be exposed to all avenues of employment in the industry and will 
analyze its basic structure. 3 credits. 

FASH 120. PERSONAL STYLING ANALYSIS 

This course is an analysis of the aesthetic components of apparel and 
accessories in relation to body and face shapes. Students will apply their 
new found knowledge to clients of their choice. Students will also build a 
vast style details vernacular. 3 credits. 

FASH 130. INTRO TO FASH CONSTRUCTION 

This course is an overview of terminology, processes and equipment basic to 
an understanding of textile products and apparel construction. Consumer 
studies of women’s and men’s apparel assembly quality. Construction of 
four simple fashion items, and samples of seams, seam finishes, darts, 
gathering, etc. to be completed during this course. 3 credits. 

FASH 230. FASHION BRANDING 

This course will provide students with the understanding of branding and 
the brand-development process within the fashion industry. In addition the 
course will focus on contemporary phrases, branding terms, concepts and 
theoretical frameworks related to branding within the fashion industry. 
Students will also be exposed to an overview of the factors contributing to 
fashion marketing and consumer behavior, and how to use consumer 
research to gain a better insight about how the fashion industry utilizes 
consumer information while simultaneously shedding light on individual 
shopping habits. 3 credits. 

FASH 240. GLOBAL TRENDS IN FASHION 

An advanced study of the fashion industry including an analysis of current 
issues facing consumers, manufacturers, and retailers. Students will 
investigate the topics of sustainability, consumer wellbeing, and counterfeit 
goods. The subject of fast-fashion will also be examined and its implications 
to the global fashion industry. 3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 194 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


FASH 260. FASHION JOURNALISM 

This course will introduce students to all areas that journalism encompasses 
in the fashion industry. Students will be exposed to the processes that work 
in conjunction to the writing: interviewing, researching, preparing and 
reporting. Emphasis on the basics of writing including style, format flow and 
mechanics. Students will complete several types of written assignments 
that can be seen in the fashion industry. Topics to be covered include writing 
for newspapers, magazines, broadcast media, advertising, public relations 
and new media. Select pieces of writing will be featured in the Fashion 
Merchandising Newsletter. 3 credits. 

FASH 310. MENSWEAR 

This course involves the study of the menswear industry with emphasis on 
garment style, fit, quality, sizing, assembly techniques, fabric terminology, 
and wardrobing. Designer presence and current menswear trends are also 
discussed. 3 credits. 

FASH 330. TEXTILES FOR APPAREL 

This course includes the study of the origins of fibers, the basic 
characteristics of fibers, yarns, fabric constructions, and finishing techniques, 
including dyeing and printing. The course has an emphasis on 
differentiating common fabrics and their uses. Lab experiences offer the 
opportunity to experiment, process, and problem solve textile uses and 
limitations. 3 credits. 

FASH 360. MERCH PLANNING & CONTROL 

Covers the terms, calculations and concepts necessary in successful 
merchandising, such as the retail method of inventory, operating 
statements, techniques of planning seasonal purchases, and methods of 
figuring mark-ups, turnover, open-to-buy, mark-downs, as well as terms of 
sale. 3 credits. 

FASH 370. FASHION ENTREPRENEURSHIP 

An opportunity for students to understand and work through the steps 
necessary to conceptualize, develop, open, and finally operate a fashion 
business. Students will learn how to develop a product and a product niche, 
conduct product research, and find funding and a good location for their 
business. At the end of this course students will also have a solid 
understanding of how to write and interpret a solid business plan. 3 credits. 

FASH 400. PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 

This course culminates the fashion merchandising undergraduate academic 
career. This senior-level course focuses on portfolio development and 
provides students with opportunities and the skills needed to secure an 
internship or job in the fashion industry or to pursue a graduate degree. 
Career-related issues include resume and portfolio development, 
interviewing, business etiquette and workplace standards. Senior standing 
or by permission of department chairperson. 2 credits. 

FASH 410. FASHION EVOLUTION 

A survey of the development of dress in western cultures. The phenomenon 
of fashion will be examined as it is reflected in some of the most important 
eras in history, including Ancient Rome, the Renaissance, the Victorian Era, 
and the World War II. 3 credits. 

FASH 430. VISUAL MERCHANDISING 

A study of the understanding of the importance of visual merchandising in 
the retail environment. Students will learn how visual merchandising 
develops a relationship between the brand, consumer, product and the 
retail environment. Students will be able to learn and apply concepts such 
as display basics, space planning principles and design research. Creative 
opportunities are provided to develop skills through the application of 
display and other promotional merchandise activities. Prerequisite: FASH 

230. 3 credits. 
FASH 450. PROD LINE DEV W/ILLUSTRATR 

This course delves into the merchandiser’s role as a product line developer. 
Students will research populations, synthesize data, formulate sample plans 
and source primary markets as necessary when implementing a ready-towear 
collection. Adobe Illustrator and Photoshop software will be employed 
for development of a complete line of clothing for a niche market of the 
student’s choice. 3 credits. 

FASH 475. FASHION MERCH INTERNSHIP 

This is an individual work/study experience. The student is provided training 
and on-the-job learning in the fashion field of study. The experience is 
coordinated and supervised by the Career Development Center. 3 credits. 

FIN 220. INTRO FINANCIAL PLANNING 

An overview of the practices and processes of the professional financial 
planning employed in the financial services industries. An introduction to 
emerging regulatory environment, capital accumulation methods, risk 
management, income tax and investment management. 3 credits. 

FIN 280. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 

Financial data are evaluated as a method of providing information to 
managerial decision-makers. Topics include a definition of the finance 
function, ratio analysis, forecasting, planning and control, capital 
budgeting, asset management and leverage. Prerequisites: ACCT 101, ECON 

105. 3 credits. 
FIN 301. INVESTMENTS 

A study of the environment and fundamentals of investing, including 
selection and management. Investment vehicles covered include: stock 
options, convertible bonds and preferred stocks, real estate, futures 
contracts, collectibles and precious metals. Prerequisite: FIN 280. 3 credits. 

FIN 310. EMP BENEFITS & RETIRE PLAN I 

An overview of the various qualified and nonqualified plans. Study includes 
defined benefits, defined contribution, target benefit and profit-sharing 
plans. Costs and funding requirements of federal laws and their collective 
effect on retirement planning as well as tax consideration are reviewed. 3 
credits. 

FIN 315. PRIN OF RISK MANAGEMENT 

An introduction to the principles of risk management through analysis of 
risk exposures and risk management techniques. Risk transfer through the 
use of life, health, casualty and liability insurance as well as contract 
selection is studied. Includes study of the private insurance industry, its 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 195 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


regulation and insurer functions, claims administration and underwriting. 3 
credits. 

FIN 345. FIN INSTITUTIONS & MKTS 

A course examining the role of money in the economic system, the 
importance of financial institutions and how they help meet society’s needs 
and the power and significance of monetary policy in the economy. 
Prerequisites: FIN 280. 3 credits. 

FIN 360. INTERNATIONAL FINANCE 

A study of the problems posed by the international financial environment in 
which corporations operate. Topics covered include foreign exchange 
markets, forwards, futures, international capital budgeting, international 
diversification, long-term international financing and country risk analysis. 
The course will also focus on the role of money in the global economy, 
including such topics as interest rates, banking, monetary policy, and 
depository and non-depository financial institutions. Prerequisite: ECON 

105. 3 credits. 
FIN 380. CORPORATE FINANCE 

This is an upper-level course in corporate finance. Building on students’ 
foundation in Financial and Managerial Accounting and Financial 
Management, the course helps them prepare for leadership roles in finance 
in corporations. The principal focus is on using accounting information for 
financial decision making using Excel wherever appropriate. The course 
covers theories, techniques and models for making such decisions, and at 
the same time, makes students aware of ethical behavior as finance 
professionals. Prerequisite: FIN 280. 3 credits. 

FIN 410. ESTATE PLANNING 

A study of estate planning law and process including methods of exclusion 
and valuation, deeds, forms of ownership, charitable transfers, business 
transfers and postmortem techniques. 3 credits. 

FIN 475. FINANCE INTERNSHIP 

An individual work-study experience in an approved business institution. 
Placement of a qualified student in a business setting which involves the 
area of interest, provides training and on-the-job learning, and prepares a 
student for business practice. Junior standing, 2.75 GPA in required business 
courses, and written permission of the program director or associate dean. 3 
credits. 

FNUT 131. INTRO TO NUTRITION 

FNUT 131 is designed for students who are not health science majors and 
focuses on consumer issues related to foods and nutrition. In discussing the 
role of nutrients in health promotion and disease prevention, the course 
material includes critical information which will help consumers sort out 
nutrition advice, concepts, principles and strategies which will enable 
consumers to personalize their food choices and answer questions that 
people often ask, i.e., vegetarianism, diets for athletes, “good” foods and 
“bad” foods, safety of food supply and fad diets. 3 credits. 

FPM 209. HOUSEKEEPING OPER & MGMT 

FPM 209 is a comprehensive study of the housekeeping department, 
housekeeping department functions, and the cost analysis of effective 
staffing and operations in the maintenance of a physical plant. This course 
offers a variety of methods and specific activities to orient participants to the 
essentials of cost effective quality management with regard to the 
housekeeping functions. Prerequisites: ACCT 101, HRIM 201. 3 credits. 

FREN 101. INTRO TO FRENCH I 

An introduction to the French language, including development of the basic 
skills: listening, speaking, reading and writing. Learning activities aimed 
towards developing communicative proficiency. For students with no prior 
study of the language. 3 credits. 

FREN 102. INTRO TO FRENCH II 

Further study of the skills introduced in Introduction to French I, including a 
continuing study of French grammar and aural-oral practice designed to 
reinforce the basic language skills. For students with 1-2 years of prior study. 
Prerequisite: FREN 101 or equivalent. 3 credits. 

FREN 125. FRENCH CULTURE 

Historical and cultural development of France. Lectures, class discussions, 
and reports on the most significant aspects and trends of political, literary, 
economic, social and artistic life. This course is conducted in English. 3 
credits. 

FREN 126. FRANCOPHONE CULTURES 

The course presents a broad overview of the contemporary cultures of the 
former French colonies in the Caribbean, Africa and Southeast Asia. Course 
readings and discussion will be organized around the broad themes of 
modernization vs. Westernization and the interplay of tradition and identity. 
The approach is interdisciplinary and will touch upon arts, religion and 
history as well as contemporary concerns related to social, political and 
economic development. The course is taught in English. 3 credits. 

FREN 130. FRENCH LITERATURE 

In this course students will read and discuss in English translation classic 
works by French authors, particularly those who have had a lasting impact 
on Western culture, including poetry, prose and drama. 3 credits. 

FREN 132. FREN THEA ENG TRANSLATION 

Students will discover plays from the golden age of French (neo-) classical 
drama of the 17th century through the 20th century. The class will learn to 
appreciate how French drama has continued to observe its traditional 
mission of divertir et instruire (“to entertain and to instruct”) while 
exploring the literary genres of comedy, tragedy, and tragicomedy and the 
literary movements such as neo-classicism, absurdism and existentialism. 
Through discussion and analysis of the works under consideration, students 
will explore drama as means of describing and critiquing society and the 
human condition. 3 credits. 

FREN 135. TOPICS FRENCH/FRANCOPHONE LITERATURE 

The Topics in French/Francophone Literature course will address literature 
from France or elsewhere in the French-speaking world and may include 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 196 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


literature from specific cultural groups, explorations of literary genres or 
themes, explorations of critical approaches to literature, author studies, etc. 
French 135 will study the works in English translation and English will be 
the language of instruction for this course. 3 credits. 

FREN 203. INTERMEDIATE FRENCH I 

Students will build on introductory-level French skills, expanding and 
improving their command of grammatical patterns and idiomatic structures 
of French in a course designed to increase proficiency in reading, writing, 
listening and speaking. Prerequisite: This course is intended for students 
with four or more years of pre-university language study or those who have 
completed FREN 102 or an equivalent course. Students with three years of 
pre-university French study may be qualified for the course but are advised 
to consult with the instructor before enrolling. 3 credits. 

FREN 204. INTERMEDIATE FRENCH II 

An intensive study of the more sophisticated grammatical patterns and 
idiomatic structures of French designed to increase proficiency in reading 
and writing the language. For students with 4 or more years of prior study. 
Prerequisite: FREN 203 or equivalent. 3 credits. 

FREN 208. INTRO TO LITERATURE 

Based on short stories, newspaper articles and excerpts from longer works, 
the course aims to develop vocabulary, reading comprehension, a sense of 
style and greater facility in discussion. Prerequisite: FREN 204 or FREN 210. 3 
credits. 

FREN 209. INTRO FRENCH CIVILIZATION 

This course presents an introduction to the contemporary culture and 
civilization of France. Readings, lectures, reports and other activities 
introduce students to the geography, history and politics of France as well as 
contemporary issues such as family life, immigration and the European 
Union which are shaping the culture of the modern French Republic. The 
language of instruction is French. Prerequisite: FREN 204 or FREN 210. 3 
credits. 

FREN 210. CONVERSATION/COMP I 

Students will develop their communicative skills, while building vocabulary 
and a greater understanding of structure and idioms, through composition 
and guided as well as spontaneous conversations. Prerequisite: FREN 102 . 3 
credits. 

FREN 220. DIRECTED STUDIES IN FRENCH* 

3 credits. 

FREN 230. FRENCH FOR BUSINESS 

Using French as the language of instruction, this course examines business 
practices in France and the Francophone world in an era of globalization. 
Students will acquire the vocabulary and cultural skills needed to interact in 
a business setting. Memo, resume and business letter writing, as well as the 
interview and telephone skills will also be practiced. Prerequisite: FREN 204. 
3 credits. 

FREN 300. CONVERSATION/COMPOSITION II 

This course is designed in sequence with Conversation/Composition I to 
provide further opportunities for creative communication, emphasizing both 
written and oral expression. Pre-requisite FREN 210. 3 credits. 

FREN 305. SEM IN CULTURE-LITERATURE 

Content determined by instructor. Focus may be on a literary movement, a 
century or a genre. Group will then examine the relationships between 
cultural patterns and literary tendencies. Prerequisite: FREN 204 or FREN 

210. 3 credits. 
FREN 308. PHONETICS 

This upper level course focuses on the mastery of the International Phonetic 
Alphabet, the phonemes and allophones of French, phonetic and phonemic 
transcription, dialectical variation, etc. Prerequisite: FREN 204 or FREN 210. 3 
credits. 

FREN 310. SEMINAR: TRANSLATION 

Examination of several basic differences in the structure of the French and 
English languages. Exercises to develop expertise precede directed and free 
composition, problems of translation. Prerequisite: FREN 210. 3 credits. 

FREN 315. INTRO TO FRENCH CINEMA 

This course focuses on the rich cultural heritage of the “Seventh Art” in 
France, reviewing the history of the form and its artistic periods as well as 
the elements which distinguish different styles. Films, readings, lectures, 
class discussions and research writing in French will build strong cultural 
and communicative skills. Prerequisite: FREN 204 or FREN 210. 3 credits. 

FREN 316. ABROAD EXPERIENCE 

With instructor approval, students may use this course to develop an 
independent study program based on their experiences abroad. Students 
must have spent at least four weeks in a French-speaking country and must 
arrange, prior to the trip, to complete a research or creative project and 
present it during the term following their return. Prerequisite: FREN 204. 3 
credits. 

FRSC 150. INTRO TO FORENSIC SCIENCE 

Course will cover the basics of the multidisciplinary fields of forensic science 
from crime scene investigation through the laboratory analysis of evidence. 
The role of the forensic scientist as an expert witness, ethics in the criminal 
justice system and professional practice of forensic science will also be 
discussed. Prerequisites: CHEM 121, BIO 142, MATH 170. 3 credits. 

FRSC 151. INTRO FORENSIC SCI LAB 

The laboratory component to the introductory course will allow the student 
hands-on activities in regard to identification, collection, processing and 
analysis of evidence as presented in the classroom lectures, as well as the 
courtroom presentation. Corequisite: FRSC 150. 1 credit. 

FRSC 242. CRIMINALISTICS I 

This course will cover the evidentiary aspect of crime scene investigations 
including the location, documentation, recovery, and laboratory analysis 
and interpretation of evidence including: blood, semen, DNA, hair, fibers, 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 197 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


ballistics, fingerprints, impressions, questioned documents and fire origins. 
Microscopy, chemical and biological analytical techniques will be stressed. 
Prerequisite: FRSC 150. 3 credits. 

FRSC 243. CRIMINALISTICS I LAB 

An introduction to the field and laboratory methods involving identification, 
examination, comparison and analysis of forensic evidence including 
fingerprints, ballistics, blood spatter, hair and fiber, questioned documents, 
footwear and tire prints and impressions, as well as the various methods of 
crime scene documentation. Corequisite: FRSC 242. 1 credit. 

FRSC 250. FORENSIC PHOTOGRAPHY 

The course is an introduction to basic techniques of crime scene 
photography. Includes discussion of cameras, digital images, lighting, 
photographic protocol, images as physical evidence and courtroom 
presentation. Prerequisite: FRSC 150. 2 credits. 

FRSC 300. ENVIRONMENTAL EVIDENCE 

This course focuses on the procedures utilized in the location, 
documentation, recovery, and analysis of natural evidence found at the 
outdoor crime scene. This is inclusive of entomological, botanical, 
archaeological and taphonomical evidence. Prerequisite: FRSC 242 or ANTH 

242. 3 credits. 
FRSC 301. ENVIRONMENTAL EVIDENCE LAB 

Hands-on component to the lecture giving the student experience in the 
techniques and protocols required in the location, documentation, recovery 
and analysis of natural evidence found at the outdoor crime scene. 
Corequisite: FRSC 300. 1 credit. 

FRSC 310. STATS FORENSIC SCI&ANTH 

This course is an introduction to morphometrics and will cover the statistical 
techniques most commonly employed in Forensic Science and 
Anthropology. Topics will include correlation, regression techniques, EDA, 
ANOVA, ANCOVA, Factor and Principal Components Analysis and 
Discriminant Function Analysis. Prerequisites: Math 170, FRSC 150. 3 credits. 

FRSC 320. INDOOR CRIME SCENE INVEST 

The course will provide an overview of forensic investigative techniques 
used to process various types of indoor crime scenes. Evidence identification, 
collection, preservation and submission protocols, proper use of standards, 
chain of custody issues, and crime scene reconstruction techniques will be 
discussed in the course. In addition, the role of the crime scene technician as 
an expert witness will be explored. Prerequisites: FRSC 340. 3 credits. 

FRSC 340. PHYSICAL EVIDENCE & LAW 

Course will focus on the proper collection and documentation of physical 
evidence according to the current laws and court proceedings. Discussion 
will also include new court rulings regarding evidence and expert witness 
activities. 3 credits. 

FRSC 360. FORENSIC CHEMISTRY 

This course will address chemical concepts and practices from a forensic 
science perspective. Aspects of analytical chemistry will cover chemical 

details of presumptive testing, instrumentation, and proper statistical 
treatment of collected data. Students will learn the fundamental principles 
behind the analysis of chemical and physical evidence for drugs, 
combustion, polymers, paints and coatings while applying these principles 
to toxicological information. Prerequisite: CHEM 131. 3 credits. 

FRSC 390. CRIME SCENE ARCHAEOLOGY 

Course will include lecture and hands-on excavations of a variety of outdoor 
mock crime scenes. Topics to be covered include basic archaeology 
principles, proper excavation techniques and recovery of various classes of 
physical evidence. Prerequisite: ANTH 242. 3 credits. 

FRSC 410. DEATH INVESTIGATION 

This course is intended to examine the forensic application of death 
investigations, utilizing techniques and methodologies introduced in prior 
Forensic Science courses. The focus of the course will be on examining 
important similarities and distinctions among homicide investigations and 
various other manners of death: suicide, natural, accidental and equivocal 
deaths. The course will concentrate on the scene examination, 
documentation of the death scene, exploring the various analyses of time 
since death, and when appropriate, post-mortem interval and investigative 
protocols and procedures. Prerequisite: FRSC 320 or by permission. 3 credits. 

FRSC 440. INTRODUCTION TO GIS 

The course is an introduction to Geographic Information Systems, providing 
students with a basic knowledge of its theory and main practical 
applications, with stress on basic GIS software logics, usage and 
applications. The students will learn the usage of ESRI’s ArcGIS 9, with 
examples from different fields. At completion of the course, students will be 
able to collect, create and view geographic information data from 
preexisting sources, as well as produce their own maps and calculate basic 
descriptive spatial statistics such as measurement of dispersion and central 
location. Corequisite: FRSC 441/ Geol 441. 3 credits. 

FRSC 441. INTRO TO GIS LAB 

Computer laboratory taken as a corequisite to FRSC 440/ Geol 441. 1 credit. 

FRSC 460. FIRE SCIENCE & ARSON 

Lecture and laboratory course will cover basics of processing the fatal fire 
scene from identifying the source and paths of fire, documentation of 
accelerants, collecting evidence such as explosive residues and photographic 
documentation. Seniors only. Prerequisites: FRSC 242, FRSC 320 or by 
permission. 2 credits. 

FRSC 470. INDEPENDENT STUDY 

This course is for students interested in exploring a specialized topic in the 
field. 1-4 credits. 

FRSC 478. RESEARCH DESIGN 

In this course, students will be guided through the research design process. 
Topics to be covered include choosing a research topic, conducting a 
thorough literature search, generating hypotheses, formulating a detailed 
and practical research design to test those hypotheses, interpreting and 
reporting results, scientific writing, and research presentation guidelines. In 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 198 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


addition, discussions will be held on research ethics and grant submission 
processes. At the end of the course, students will be expected to submit a 
mock grant application incorporating the material learned in this course. 
Juniors or seniors only. Students in other scientific disciplines welcome. 2 
credits. 

GEOL 100. PHYSICAL GEOLOGY 

The significance of the rocks and minerals that form the earth; the plate 
tectonic processes that have built the continents and ocean basins; and the 
forces that shape them into their characteristic landscapes in the process of 
their creation and destruction. The basic understanding of earth processes 
for environmental reasoning and/or archaeological studies is emphasized. 
Corequisite: GEOL 102. 3 credits. 

GEOL 102. PHYSICAL GEOLOGY LAB 

A hands-on approach to studying the geologic processes that have shaped 
and continue to shape the Earth. Corequisite: GEOL 100. 1 credit. 

GEOL 110. HISTORICAL GEOLOGY 

An introduction to the evolution of life on Earth, from sea creatures to 
dinosaurs. Topics include the birth and future death of the earth, movement 
of the continents, the impact of asteroids and comets on life and landforms 
with associated extinction events, structure and composition of the Earth. 
Emphasis placed on the history of life as told by fossils preserved in the 
Earth's crust. Corequisite: GEOL 111. 3 credits. 

GEOL 111. HISTORICAL GEOLOGY LAB 

A hands-on approach to studying the geological history of the Earth;special 
emphasis will be placed on laboratory and field studies. Corequisite: GEOL 

110. 1 credits. 
GEOL 114. INTRO TO SPACE SCIENCES 

This course will investigate the relationship between humans and space. 
The history of humankind's development in understanding space will be 
covered from various perspectives such as Newton and Galileo. Students will 
gain an understanding of the birth of the cosmos, the solar system, 
meteorites and asteroids, black holes, and astronomy. Topics will also 
include the future of space exploration including commercial space flight. 3 
credits. 

GEOL 124. CATACLYSMIC GEOLOGY 

A study of natural disasters including volcanic eruptions earthquakes, 
landslides and tsunamis. Attention will focus on their causes, locations of 
occurrence, effects on civilization and hazard mitigation. Both historical and 
hypothetical natural disasters will be studied. Corequisite: GEOL 125. 3 
credits. 

GEOL 125. CATACLYSMIC GEOLOGY LAB 

A laboratory approach to studying natural disasters and their causes; taken 
as a co-requisite to Cataclysmic Geology. Corequisite: GEOL 124. 1 credit. 

GEOL 203. VOYAGES TO TERREST PLANETS 

An examination of the inner solar system including its origin and the history 
of its exploration. Special attention will focus on the processes that have 

shaped and modified inner solar system objects and the future of human 
and robotic exploration of these bodies. Corequisite: GEOL 113. 3 credits. 

GEOL 204. VOYAGES TERREST PLANET LAB 

Emphasis will be placed on the geography of the terrestrial planets, the 
processes shaping those planets, and the techniques used to study those 
processes. Corequisite: GEOL 112. 1 credits. 

GEOL 205. CITIES ON ACTIVE VOLCANOES 

This course will address processes that occur at volcanoes. The varieties and 
underlying causes of volcanism will be examined through lectures, 
discussions, and in class activities. Hazards associated with volcanoes will 
also be studied with a special emphasis on how humans have interacted 
with volcanoes with various degrees of success. The course will culminate 
with a field trip to examine a volcano. 3 credits. 

GEOL 206. CITIES ACTIV VOLCANOES LAB 

In this laboratory section, we will take a hands-on approach to addressing 
concepts presented in GEOL 205. This approach will involve laboratory 
exercises that stem from sample descriptions, in class activities, and 
hypothetical situations. 1 credits. 

GEOL 211. MINERALOGY 

Description, classification, and genetic interpretations of minerals. 
Prerequisite: GEOL 100. 3 credits. 

GEOL 212. MINERALOGY LAB 

A study of elementary crystallography and an examination of common 
minerals. 1 credit. 

GEOL 215. GEOMORPHOLOGY 

A study of the earth's landforms, their classification, origin and the forces of 
wind, waves, streams, glaciers and gravity that have caused our present 
landscapes and are causing them to change. Soil development and 
interpretation is also covered. Prerequisite: GEOL 100. Corequisite: GEOL 

216. 3 credits. 
GEOL 216. GEOMORPHOLOGY LAB 

An in-depth and hands-on approach to studying geologic processes that 
have shaped and continue to shape the Earth; field-based exercises will be 
implemented when possible. Corequisite: GEOL 215. 1 credit. 

GEOL 225. SCIENCE ON DISPLAY 

This course examines natural history museums. Basic concepts include the 
role of museums in education, natural history collection management and 
legal practices. Special emphasis will be placed on geology, paleontology, 
entomology, conchology and osteology. Students will apply principles 
covered in class to evaluate exhibits and collections in public and private 
situations. Co-requisite GEOL 226. 3 credits. 

GEOL 226. SCIENCE ON DISPLAY LAB 

A laboratory approach taken as a co-requisite to GEOL 225. This lab section 
will involve field trips to examine science displays in the greater Erie area. 
Co-requisite GEOL 225. 1 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 199 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


GEOL 235. PALEOCLIMATLGY:SCI GLB WRM 

Paleoclimatology deals with the characteristics of Earth’s climate in the past. 
This course will explore how and why Earth’s climate has changed over time 
and the implications of that change. A hands-on approach will be taken 
where students will be out in the field collecting climate-related data and 
will discuss the techniques used in studying past climates. Earth’s changing 
climate over the past 10,000 years will also be emphasized. Co-requisite 
GEOL 236. 3 credits. 

GEOL 236. PALEOCLIMA:SCI GLB WRM LAB 

A laboratory approach taken as a co-requisite to GEOL 235. Co-requisite 
GEOL 235. 1 credit. 

GEOL 240. PALEONTOLOGY 

A broad survey of fossil invertebrates, vertebrates and plants. Direct 
examination of actual specimens to familiarize the student with 
morphology and characteristics of common as well as rarely seen fossils. 
Special topics will address exceptional preservation, extinction, 
paleopathology and data retrieval from the fossil record. Offered alternate 
years. Prerequisites: GEOL 100, GEOL 110, BIO 146. Corequisite: GEOL 241. 3 
credits. 

GEOL 241. PALEONTOLOGY LAB 

An in-depth examination of fossils from diverse localities and preservational 
modes, including evolutionary and taxonomic problems stressing 
identification and interpretation. Field experiences are anticipated. 
Corequisite: GEOL 240. 1 credit. 

GEOL 260. HYDROGEOLOGY 

An introduction to the origin, occurrence, regimen and utilization of the 
ground water sector of the hydrological cycle; the geological influences and 
chemical aspects of ground water, location, evaluation, and influence of 
man. Prerequisites: GEOL 100, GEOL 110. Corequisite: GEOL 261. 3 credits. 

GEOL 261. HYDROGEOLOGY LAB 

A hands-on examination of the study of water in the natural environment 
with an emphasis on both surficial and groundwater. Corequisite: GEOL 260. 
1 credit. 

GEOL 288. ENERGY&ENVIRONMNTL JUSTICE 

This course explores the socioeconomic and cultural implications of human 
interactions with the physical environment. Principal topics will include: 
Issues associated with fossil fuel extraction and use as well as the 
development of renewable energy sources. Using these topics, we will 
examine the idea of environmental racism and injustice towards various 
cultures and nations. We will also explore future energy needs that result 
from an energy independent United States and the consequent effects on 
the green energy field and global relationships with oil and gas producing 
nations. 4 credits. 

GEOL 299. GEOLOGIC EXCURSIONS 

Instructor-led geology field trip. Previous destinations included northern 
Arizona, northern California, the Smoky Mountains, and southern Utah. 0 
credits. 

GEOL 306. SOILS 

The study of the processes and environmental conditions that result in the 
formation of soils; the relationships among climate, rock type, and time 
duration that cause soils to possess different chemical and physical 
properties; and the various schemes and the nomenclature by which soils 
are classified. Prerequisite: GEOL 100. Corequisite: GEOL 307. 3 credits. 

GEOL 307. SOILS LAB 

The analysis and interpretation of soils maps; the field descriptions of 
general soil features; the recording of site and profile data; and soil 
sampling methods. Corequisite: GEOL 306. 1 credits. 

GEOL 310. PETROLOGY 

Description, classification and genetic interpretations of minerals. 
Prerequisites: GEOL 100, GEOL 211, or permission. Corequisite: GEOL 214. 3 
credits. 

GEOL 311. PETROLOGY LAB 

A study of the texture and composition of rocks, both hand specimens and 
thin sections. Laboratory work may include the preparation of thin sections. 
Corequisite: GEOL 213. 1 credit. 

GEOL 342. SEDIMENTOLOGY&STRATIGRAPHY 

An introduction to processes and environments of sedimentation and the 
principles employed in the examination of sediments and sedimentary 
rocks. Hand specimens and sequences will be studied for characteristics and 
origins. Prerequisite: GEOL 100. Corequisite: GEOL 246. 3 credits. 

GEOL 343. SEDIMENTOL&STRATIGRAPH LAB 

A laboratory approach to studying sedimentary processes and 
environments; taken as a corequisite to Sedimentation. Corequisite: GEOL 

245. 1 credit. 
GEOL 350. STRUCTURAL GEOLOGY 

Identification and interpretation of structural geologic features including 
the construction and use of structural maps and cross-sections. Prerequisite: 
GEOL. 3 credits. 

GEOL 351. STRUCTURAL GEOLOGY LAB 

A laboratory approach to studying deformation of the Earth. Corequisite: 
GEOL 250. 1 credit. 

GEOL 370. DENDROCHRONOLOGY 

Dendrochronology deals with time as recorded by tree rings. Information 
extracted from tree rings can subsequently be used to make predictions 
about past climate and paleo-environmental conditions, geologic and 
anthropological events, and even fire cycles. This class will present the 
fundamental principles of how to conduct dendrochronologic studies and 
will emphasize the techniques of collecting and interpreting tree ring 
data.Applications of dendrochronology will also be explored. 3 credits. 

GEOL 380. PRIN OF REMOTE SENSING 

This course will address the theories and fundamentals of acquiring, 
processing and interpreting remotely sensed datasets. Special attention will 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 200 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


be paid to geological, archaeological, environmental and urban applications 
of remotely sensed data collected through both air and space-borne 
platforms. Co-requisite GEOL 381. 3 credits. 

GEOL 381. PRIN REMOTE SENSING LAB 

This course is a laboratory approach to acquiring, processing, and 
interpreting remotely sensed imagery. Co-requisite GEOL 380. 1 credit. 

GEOL 410. SEMINAR AND RESEARCH 

Special topics in geology may be pursued on an advanced level, often 
involving an extensive literature search with accompanying oral and written 
reports. Students have the opportunity to choose, develop and complete an 
original research problem followed by preparation of a report suitable for 
publication. Consent of instructor. 1-4 credits. 

GEOL 430. GEOARCHAEOLOGY 

Geoarchaeology (archaeology) examines in detail the interface which exists 
between the fields of geology and the anthropological sub-discipline of 
archaeology. The purpose of this course is to acquaint the student not only 
with the history of the interrelationship between these academic specialties 
but also to document and illustrate the range of geological techniques 
which are useful to the contemporary archaeologist. More specifically, via 
lectures and laboratory work, this course will detail how geological methods 
may be employed in the location, excavation and interpretation of 
archaeological sites and materials. Prerequisites: GEOL 100, GEOL 245, GEOL 

247. Corequisite: GEOL 431. 3 credits. 
GEOL 431. GEOARCHAEOLOGY LAB 

Field and laboratory exercises will emphasize landform analysis. Sample 
processing and analysis will be performed in the laboratory. Corequisite: 
GEOL/ANTH 430. 1 credit. 

GEOL 440. INTRO TO GIS 

This course is an introduction to Geographic Information Systems, providing 
students with a basic knowledge of its theory, and main practical 
applications, with stress on basic GIS software logics, usage and 
applications. The student will learn the usage of ESRI's ArcGIS 9, with 
examples from different fields. At completion of the course, students will be 
able to collect, create and view geographic information data from 
preexisting sources as well as produce their own maps and calculate basic 
descriptive spatial statistics such as measurements of dispersion and central 
location. Corequisite: GEOL 441. 3 credits. 

GEOL 441. INTRO TO GIS LAB 

Computer laboratory work taken as a corequisite to GEOL 440. Corequisite: 
GEOL 440. 1 credits. 

GEOL 455. FIELD METHODS IN GEOLOGY 

Introduction to the use of field equipment including Brunton compasses, 
surveying and mapping instruments, geophysical instruments, including the 
field seismometer and GIS applications used in processing data. Typically 
offered during summer. Instructor permission. Prerequisite: GEOL 100. 3-6 
credits. 

GEOL 490. SENIOR THESIS 

Prerequisite: ANTH 390 and permission from instructor. 3 credits. 

GEOL 515. ADVANCED GEOMORPHOLOGY 

A study of the earth's landforms, their classification, origin, and the forces of 
wind, waves, streams, glaciers and gravity that have cause our present 
landscapes and are causing them to change. Soil development and 
interpreation are alo covered. 3 credits. 

HIS 101. US HISTORY TO 1865 

This course is a broad survey examining American history from the start of 
the first European settlements in North America in the seventeenth century 
to the end of the Civil War. Over the course of the term students will explore 
the important social, political, economic, and cultural issues that emerged 
from Europe's colonization of the New World, and how these developments 
shaped the founding, and early formative history of the United States. 3 
credits. 

HIS 102. US HISTORY SINCE 1865 

This course broadly examines the major political, social, economic, and 
cultural trends in America from the end of the Civil War through the end of 
the Cold War. Particular emphasis is placed on the factors that contributed 
to the rise of the United States as a political and economic world power, and 
how those developments broadly shaped the course of American society. 3 
credits. 

HIS 145. EUROPE HIST TO RENAISSANCE 

This course examines the genesis of the ancient civilizations that centered 
on the Mediterranean, their collapse and replacement by feudal kingdoms, 
and the origins of the great powers of 20th century Europe. Particular 
attention is devoted to understanding the dynamics of long term success 
and failure, and the interaction of religious and political institutions. 3 
credits. 

HIS 146. EUROPE HIST SINCE RENAISS 

This course traces the transformation of Western society from an agrarian 
society with firmly entrenched and rigid notions about class, gender and 
religion to a modern, industrialized and predominately urban society. The 
emphasis is on the political, economic, social and intellectual forces that 
were active in this turbulent transformation. 3 credits. 

HIS 170. WRLD HIS I:AGR TO ZHENG HE 

This course presents a broad survey of the ideological, economic, political, 
social, and cultural historical forces at work in shaping our global past, 
examining the manners in which human societies have organized 
themselves to meet the challenges of rising human populations, demands 
on natural resources, contacts with diverse cultures and values, and new 
ideas and ideologies. We will concentrate on human societies from the 
experiments with agriculture (ca. 10, 000 BCE) to the voyages of Zheng He 
and Columbus (ca. 1500 CE). 3 credits. 

HIS 171. WRLD HIS II:EXPLR-ATOMIC 

In this course students examine the major issues that have shaped the 
human experience from the age of exploration and discovery (1500) to the 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 201 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


present. We examine the major social and cultural conflicts, major political 
developments, and analyze the interactions between diverse peoples and 
societies around the world and the ways that religion, gender, and violence 
influenced their development. This course is an examination of critical 
events throughout world history that have shaped our present society. 3 
credits. 

HIS 175. WORLD GEOGRAPHY 

In this introductory course we will study selected regions of the world, 
emphasizing the demographic, cultural, political, economic, and historic 
patterns of different regions. We will pay close attention to human-
environmental interactions. A goal of this challenging course is to apply 
geographic concepts to identify and describe relationships between people 
and places. 3 credits. 

HIS 211. COLONIAL AMERICA 

This course examines the emergence of Colonial America, with the founding 
of the Jamestown colony in 1607, to the eve of the Revolutionary crisis in 
1763. During the semester students will explore the creation of viable 
political, social, economic structures, emphasizing the transition of colonial 
North America from a series of isolated colonial outpost to imperial 
provinces. Among the topics to be considered include: community and 
family relations, colonial religious patterns; slavery and race relations; and 
internal and external tensions. 3 credits. 

HIS 212. REVOLUTIONARY AMERICA 

This course, in the broadest sense, covers the history of America from the 
start of the revolutionary crisis Constitutional debate, 1763-1787. Students 
will explore the origins, meaning and consequences of the Colonial 
America's Revolution, looking at how the struggle for the colonies' struggle 
for independence from England impacted America society, politics, culture 
and economics, eventually giving rise to the United States. 3 credits. 

HIS 213. EARLY REPUBLICAN AMERICA 

The period 1781 to 1848 was bookended by the two defining moments in 
early American history—the end of hostilities with Great Britain and the 
Mexican-American War. Although the interim period was not marked by 
any large-scale military conflict, domestic political and social disputes 
engaged Americans from all walks of life. Caucasian, African and Native 
Americans; men and women; rich and poor; eastern and western; northern 
and southern—all possessed different visions of what the United States 
should be. This course will explore the intense struggle conducted by these 
disparate Americans to forge a nation. 3 credits. 

HIS 214. PENNSYLVANIA HISTORY 

This course covers the history of Pennsylvania from the prehistoric period 
through the modern era, emphasizing the major social, intellectual, cultural, 
political and economic developments that have occurred throughout the 
commonwealth’s long and diverse history. In addition, emphasis will be 
placed on the contributions of Pennsylvania and its inhabitants to the 
American nation and the world. 3 credits. 

HIS 216. CIVIL WAR&RECONSTRUCTION 

This course broadly examines American society and politics from the 
Jacksonian Era through the end of Reconstruction with major focus on that 
great American tragedy, the Civil War. During the semester students will 
explore the economic, political, social and cultural forces that brought forth 
the conflict between the states, the war that ensued, and the new nation 
that emerged in its aftermath. 3 credits. 

HIS 217. MAKING MODERN AMER 1877-1920 

This course explores a period in American history characterized by massive 
and, often times, disruptive, economic, political and social changes and 
looks at the diverse efforts Americans made to adapt to these changes. In 
the four decades following Reconstruction the United States saw the rise of 
modern industrial capitalism. It was also a period marked by unprecedented 
rates of immigration, rapid urbanization, and growing economic, racial and 
gender inequalities. Responding to increasing tensions a reform impulse 
swept the nation as Americans attempted to come to terms with modernity. 
By the early 20th century, so many reform movements were at play that 
Americans began to speak of a Progressive Era, an age marked by nascent 
idealism, and beneficial economic, political and social changes. In all, 
America by the end of World War I in many ways barely resembled the 
nation of the Reconstruction Era. 3 credits. 

HIS 219. WORLD WAR II 

This course examines the history of World War II, the most widespread, 
costly and destructive war in world history. We will explore the origins of 
the war, the strategies pursued by the participants, the major events in the 
Pacific and European theaters from the 1930s until 1945, as well as the 
impact of the conflict on Americans and American society here at home. 
Finally, we will consider the national and international significance of the 
war, as well as the national memory of the war, including its depiction and 
commemoration in cultural forms such as museums and Hollywood film. 3 
credits. 

HIS 220. AMERICA SINCE 1945 

In this course students examine the social, economic, political, and cultural 
forces that have shaped the United States since World War II. We explore 
the politics and Cold War culture of the 1950s, American foreign policy 
throughout the period—especially Vietnam—as well as the social change 
movements of the 1960s, the sobering and transformative events of the 
1970s, the subsequent enduring imprint on the American political and 
economic landscape left by the “Reagan Revolution,” and the rise of lone-
superpower militarism since the end of the Cold War. In many ways, this 
course is a critical examination of the roots of contemporary America. 3 
credits. 

HIS 221. US ENVIRONMENTAL HISTORY 

With a wide-angled multidisciplinary lens, students in this course explore 
the central importance of nature and the environment in American history. 
From Thoreau to pink flamingoes, we trace shifting conceptions of “nature” 
in American cultural history. In addition, we survey the history of 
environmental change, focusing on the historical impact of human activity 
upon local and regional environments from New England to California. 
Finally, students examine the often contested political and legislative 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 202 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


response of Americans to environmental problems since the late 19th 
century. 3 credits. 

HIS 224. THE VIETNAM WAR 

This look at the Vietnam War begins by examining the history of Vietnam 
but focuses on the American experience. Three central questions are 
addressed: How and why did the U.S. get involved? What was the nature of 
that involvement and what went wrong? And what were/are the 
lessons/results of the war?. 3 credits. 

HIS 225. EXPL AMER CULT 1920-PRESENT 

This course explores main currents of modern (post-1920) American culture, 
with a focus on popular cultural forms. An examination of the historical and 
cultural roots of enduring American myths such as individualism, endless 
abundance and success provides the theoretical framework for the course. 
An American Studies theoretical foundation allows students to then engage 
in a lively survey of select periods and themes of American popular culture 
over the past century. Students will examine the rise of consumerism, the 
centrality of the automobile and The Road as forces in American life, the 
ways in which race and gender are constructed through popular culture 
forms, and the transformative role of technology in the lives of Americans. 3 
credits. 

HIS 230. HISTORY OF AMERICAN WEST 

Although there are earlier “wests” in American history, the focus in this 
course is on the trans-Mississippi West, that mythic landscape which has 
shaped so much of both American history and our national identity. There 
we encounter the native peoples who first inhabited the region and the 
European Americans who largely supplanted them and sought to tame an 
unforgivably vast, unceasingly sublime landscape. Students encounter 
explorers, trappers, cowboys, gunslingers, railroad builders, gold rush 
miners, cattle barons, homesteaders, sightseers, dam builders, Dust Bowl 
migrants, and more, all of whose encounters with the West are the stuff of 
legend and history. 3 credits. 

HIS 232. AFRICAN-AMERICANS IN FILMS 

The role of African-Americans in cinematic films has varied widely, ranging 
from “brutal savages” in D.W. Griffith’s Birth of a Nation to dynamic and 
powerful leaders as seen in Spike Lee’s Malcolm X. This course explores the 
African-American experience through the cultural medium of cinema. 
Particular emphasis will be placed on examining how Hollywood 
represented African-Americans and thereby reinforced, shaped and altered 
public perceptions of race and the role of blacks in society. The course will 
also investigate how historical developments in turn influenced the 
depiction of African-Americans in film, examining the modern Civil Rights 
struggle within the context of the film industry. 3 credits. 

HIS 235. INTR PUBLIC HIS&MUSEUM STD 

In this class students explore the broadly encompassing field of public 
history, examining first issues of popular memory—how and why certain 
histories are remembered and others forgotten or repressed. We survey the 
history, purpose and functions of history museums, exhibits, and historic 
sites, as well as other sub-fields such as cultural landscapes, oral history, and 
documentary film. Through extensive readings, discussion, field trips and 

assignments, we examine why and how American history is at once 
frequently both preserved and perverted, depicted and denied in the public 
realm. 3 credits. 

HIS 236. INTRO HIST PRESERVATION 

In this course students will study the evolution of the preservation 
movement in the U.S. from its historic roots to the state of the field and the 
challenges facing it today. We examine shifting theoretical approaches, as 
well as the various forces driving preservation. Students gain an 
understanding of the tools preservationists use today, including historical 
research, state, federal and local law, community organizational support, 
and the application of scientific and technological methods to building 
preservation. 3 credits. 

HIS 240. MUSEUM STUDIES II 

This course exposes students to fundamental approaches and best practices 
employed by history museum professionals. Students learn the changing 
nature of methods adopted by curators and educators to care, preserve, and 
interpret artifacts to the public. Through various class projects, students 
have opportunities to apply concepts presented in the course. 3 credits. 

HIS 245. ANCIENT GREECE 

We will survey ancient Greek civilizations from the Bronze Age through the 
integration of the Greek world into the Roman hegemony. The emphasis is 
on the varying intellectual, political, aesthetic and social forces that came 
into play at various stages of Greek history and the ways in which these 
shaped modern Western values. 3 credits. 

HIS 246. ANCIENT ROME 

This course surveys ancient Roman History from the early Iron Age through 
the collapse of the Western Roman Empire in the fifth century CE. The 
emphasis is on the military, political, aesthetic and social forces that came 
into play at the various stages of this history. Given the decisive influence of 
this history on the American founders, we are especially interested in 
understanding the political transformation from republic to monarchy that 
took place over the period c. 100 BCE to c. 100 CE. 3 credits. 

HIS 247. MEDIEVAL EUROPE 

This course plots Western European History between the collapse of the 
Roman Empire and the 14th century. Featured topics include the 
Carolingians, the Crusades, the dramatic conflict of Popes and Kings and the 
origins of modern warfare. 3 credits. 

HIS 255. FREN REVOLUTION THR SIMULATION* 

This course teaches students through an innovative pedagogy that includes 
role-playing, debate and critical thinking. Students act as members of the 
National Assembly and steer the course of the revolution themselves! What 
better way to learn history than through playing a game. As members of 
the National Assembly students will use primary source materials as 
evidence in an attempt to persuade the assembly to follow their factions 
values and agenda. 3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 203 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


HIS 270. 20TH CENTURY WORLD HIST 

In this course students survey the major issues that have shaped the 20th 
century human experience from the beginning of World War I to the present 
time. The course assesses the causes and consequences of global violence so 
prevalent in the 20th century. It is centered on teaching an appreciation for 
non-western cultures and considers relations between non-western powers 
(specifically, Middle Eastern, African, and Asian countries) and European and 
American powers. We examine the development of modern warfare, new 
political ideologies, and the fall of communism. 20th Century World History 
exposes students to diverse perspectives and key social, cultural, and 
political events that shaped our world today. 3 credits. 

HIS 272. SOVIET RUSSIA 

This course surveys Soviet history from its inception in 1917 to its collapse in 
1991. We explore the fundamental political, social, economic, and cultural 
changes that occurred during the building of communism in the Soviet 
Union. In tracing the development of communism we will consider the 
violent efforts to build a socialist society and its origins, the new Soviet 
culture that formed, and the development of Soviet nationality policy. We 
will examine the ways that the newly minted Soviet Union weathered and 
rallied during World War II, postwar efforts to reinstitute stability, and the 
breakup of the USSR. 3 credits. 

HIS 274. MODERN MIDDLE EASTERN HIST 

This survey course will introduce students to the modern Middle East. The 
course will chart Middle Eastern History from the 1300s to the present. We 
will investigate the transformation of the Middle East as it meets the West, 
its interaction with Europe, and we will examine the Middle East’s age of 
independence. Throughout the course, we will examine various themes, 
including gender, religion, and class. We will cover the following topics: 
European imperialism in the Middle East and its affects, the Arab-Israeli 
conflict, the Iranian Revolution, and the petroleum era, radicalism, while 
placing them within the broader framework of the modern Middle East. We 
will conclude by addressing recent developments in the region and its 
outlook for the future. 3 credits. 

HIS 280. GENDERING WORLD HISTORY I 

This course will broadly examine the historical issues of gender and power in 
the ancient world up to ca. 1500 CE. Most of ancient (and modern) history 
has been organized, ruled and written by males. Patriarchy became the 
norm, and was firmly set into place. But were women really as powerless as 
we might assume? This question challenges us to investigate and 
understand how gendered perceptions of social, economic, cultural, 
ideological, and political practices developed in ancient civilizations. We 
will explore the ways gendered participation in society was enhanced and 
limited by factors such as social status, ethnic and cultural ideologies, 
economic systems, religion, and political structures. Students will see the 
personal side of history through biographic and autobiographic evidence, 
and examine the how and why behind gender relations. 3 credits. 

HIS 281. GENDERING WORLD HIST II 

Gendering World History II is a seminar based course (predominately 
reading and discussion), which examinees gender and its intersection with 
class, race, and how each influences the development of social relations, 

communities, and civilizations from 1500 to the present. It will investigate 
the role of such factors in the Atlantic Slave trade, the building of empires, 
Islamic states, the choice and acceptance of leaders, the women’s rights 
movement, in the building of Communist states, and the outbreak of 
revolutions. We will enter into our journey by examining the lives of various 
men and women through their stories—their autobiographies and 
biographies, primary sources and historical novels. Students will investigate 
the “why” behind gender relations. Instead of focusing on how to change 
certain gendered practices in the Modern World, Gendering World History 
seeks to understand how such practices develop so that we as can better 
understand the Modern World. 3 credits. 

HIS 301. HIST METH&HISTORIOGRAPHY 

This course focuses on the discipline of history: what it is, what historians 
do, how they do it, and why. A reading and writing-intensive course, we 
will examine the discipline of history, exploring different schools of 
historical thought. Part of the process of investigating the history of History 
will be an examination of our assumptions about the past, about history, 
and about the discipline of History. We will focus on the processes of 
historical research and writing, with an emphasis on the development of 
skills in primary source analysis, critique of scholarly opinion, organization of 
research, critical thinking, effective writing, and verbal communication of 
arguments and ideas in a seminar setting. 3 credits. 

HIS 302. TCH SECONDARY SOC STUDIES 

This course will prepare students to teach history and social studies in 
grades 7 through 12 based on standards created by the National Council for 
Social Studies and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The course will 
emphasize the structure and delivery of content, assessment methods, use 
of technology and other sources, and methods to encourage student 
learning and participation. 3 credits. 

HIS 305. AMER MAT CULT&BUILT LDSCP 

In this course students explore the many ways in which the material 
artifacts and built environments of Americans serve as historical “texts”— 
to be studied, and often, preserved and interpreted for the public. We learn 
to see America’s tangible, three-dimensional cultural landscape as a 
window into the attitudes, values, beliefs, behaviors, hopes, ideals, 
achievements, and fears of Americans across time and space. Extensive 
reading in the field of material culture studies, along with lecture, film, 
discussion, and two field trips shape the course. Along the way, students 
are challenged to conduct their own interpretations of places and objects 
and think about their meanings and significance in American history. 3 
credits. 

HIS 325. AMERICA IN THE NUCLEAR AGE 

America in the Nuclear Age offers an interdisciplinary exploration of one of 
the central issues of human experience since 1945: the development and 
proliferation of nuclear weapons. From Hiroshima to the revived nuclear 
nightmares of a post-9/11-“Ground Zero” world, we unravel the political 
history of nuclear weapons, examine their impact on human and 
environmental health, and probe the ways in which nuclear technology has 
fundamentally permeated our culture, our consciousness, and our sense of 
security. We pay special attention to the role of Hollywood cinema in 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 204 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


reflecting U.S. policy and shaping popular attitudes regarding nuclear 
technology and the unthinkable possibility of nuclear war. 3 credits. 

HIS 326. THE TURBULENT SIXTIES 

Students in this course will explore in depth “The Sixties,” one of the most 
transformational periods in all of American history. We will pay special 
attention to the ways in which the dramatic changes emanating from the 
mid-1950s through the early 1970s on a range of issues and topics—race 
and gender relations, the health of our democracy, America’s role in the 
world, our relationship with the natural and built environments, among 
many others—continue to shape the nation today. 3 credits. 

HIS 327. CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT 

This course explores the Civil Rights Movement and the struggle for racial 
and social justice in 20th century America. Particular focus is placed on 
examining the socio-political and legal mechanisms constructed in public 
and private sectors to sustain racial inequality and restrict civil liberties, and 
the subsequent campaigns to overcome these barriers. Among the topics to 
be discussed: Jim Crow; Scottsboro; executive and judicial responses to the 
Civil Rights movement; the student sit-in movement; urban revolts of 
the1960s; and the rise of mass protests through the 1970s. 3 credits. 

HIS 345. ANC GREEK&ROMN HIS WRITERS 

This course follows the creation and early development of historical writing 
as a genre of European literature. Particular emphasis will be on the Greek 
writers Herodotus, Thucydides and Plutarch, as well as the Roman writers 
Livy and Suetonius. 3 credits. 

HIS 346. FAMOUS GREEKS & ROMANS 

This course highlights notable figures from antiquity such as Socrates and 
Julius Caesar in an attempt to understand fame and virtue as the Ancient 
Greeks and Romans understood it. 3 credits. 

HIS 352. ANTI-SEM BEFORE HOLOCAUST 

The course traces the historical, political, religious, and social threads of 
anti-Semitism from antiquity to the first decade of the 20th century. In so 
doing, it provides a prelude and a context for Nazi ideology in forming the 
Holocaust. More broadly, the course explores the ways in which cultural 
identity, political loyalty, and religious affiliation constitute volatile 
interactive forces in human history. 3 credits. 

HIS 370. ANCIENT HIST&MODERN MEDIA 

From Gladiator to Rome, the silver screen and television are awash with epic 
movies and TV series set in the ancient world. This course examines the 
reception and interpretation of the ancient world by the modern world, as 
seen through various media such as paintings, architecture, and film from 
the nineteenth century into our own time. We will focus on how the past 
has been and continues to be (re..)interpreted for the present political and 
social context. 3 credits. 

HIS 371. RUSSIAN FILM 

In this course we will examine the evolution of Russian/Soviet cinema from 
pre-revolutionary filmmaking and the experimental work of the 1920s, 
through Socialist Realism, to the late Soviet and post-Soviet periods. We will 

view films by Eisenstein, Tarkovsky, Mikhalkov, and others—including 
some of the greatest films ever made, according to many film critics. 3 
credits. 

HIS 381. EMPIRE & IMPERIALISM II 

This course will examine the origins, development, and dissolution of 
Modern Empires (18th century to 20th century). We examine the political, 
economic and military motives for empire building. We will also 
investigate the responses to imperialism, whether acceptance, complacency 
or resistance. We will explore the continued influence of imperial notions 
on our present-day world. 3 credits. 

HIS 382. CRIME&VIOLENCE MODRN WRLD 

Crime, Gender & Violence in the Modern World is a seminar-based course 
(predominately reading and discussion), which will cover the period from 
1600s to the present. It will examine the influence of gender, ethnicity, and 
race on crime and justice throughout the Modern World (Americas, Europe, 
Russia, Middle East, Africa, & Asia). The approach is historical in nature and 
utilizes the development of law to better understand historical content. 
Topics include: the historical development crime and justice, women and 
men & the law; sexual harassment; women and men as victims of violence 
(rape, domestic violence, pornography, trafficking, etc.); issues of gender 
and race; women/men and prison; and women/men and terrorism. 3 
credits. 

HIS 383. HITLER & STALIN 

This course examines the dictatorships of Hitler and Stalin in terms of their 
political, social and cultural dimensions. It traces the development of the 
totalitarian regimes in German and the Soviet Union up to and including 
World War II and subsequent changes in the post-war world. We will 
consider the following topics: the legacy of the dictatorships beyond World 
War II, how German and Russian societies come to terms with the 
aftermath of these repressive rulers, and how has the collective memory 
dealt with the era. 3 credits. 

HIS 391. SPECIAL TOPICS: AMER HIST 

Special Topics courses will cover specialized content in American history not 
available in the regular curriculum. Courses may be offered as a regular 
class or as an independent study. As an independent study, in conjunction 
with a cooperating faculty member, students select a topic of study to 
pursue independently and intensively over the course of a term. The 
participating faculty member meets weekly with the student to discuss 
assigned readings as well as written materials prepared by the student as 
part of course requirements. 3 credits. 

HIS 392. SPECIAL TOPICS:EURO HIST 

Special Topics courses will cover specialized content in European history not 
available in the regular curriculum. Courses may be offered as a regular 
class or as an independent study. As an independent study, in conjunction 
with a cooperating faculty member, students select a topic of study to 
pursue independently and intensively over the course of a term. The 
participating faculty member meets weekly with the student to discuss 
assigned readings as well as written materials prepared by the student as 
part of course requirements. 3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 205 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


HIS 393. SPECIAL TOPICS: WORLD HIST 

Special Topics courses will cover specialized content in World history not 
available in the regular curriculum. Courses may be offered as a regular 
class or as an independent study. As an independent study, in conjunction 
with a cooperating faculty member, students select a topic of study to 
pursue independently and intensively over the course of a term. The 
participating faculty member meets weekly with the student to discuss 
assigned readings as well as written materials prepared by the student as 
part of course requirements. 3 credits. 

HIS 394. SPECIAL TOPICS:PUBLIC HIST 

Through independent study with the coordinator of the public history 
program, the student pursues in-depth study of a particular self-chosen area 
of the field. 3 credits. 

HIS 475. HISTORY/PUBLIC HIST INTERN 

Completed through a cooperating museum, historical agency, business, or 
non-profit institution, the history internship offers students an opportunity 
to acquire real-world experience in public history. Conducting archival 
research, assisting with the exhibit development, and conducting tours for 
the public are among the many hands-on learning opportunities provided to 
student interns. Internships must be approved by the History Department 
internship supervisor. 3 credits. 

HIS 480. SENIOR SEMINAR IN HISTORY 

The capstone seminar experience will focus on intensive scholarly study of a 
specific topic in history. Topics will vary. In addition to studying a specific 
topic, students will read and develop an understanding of the 
historiography and principal interpretations related to the topic. Each 
student will also research and write a 15-to 20-page paper incorporating 
both primary and secondary sources. Designed as a capstone experience, it 
will ask the students to demonstrate a mastery of the historical process, 
both in terms of assimilating historical ideas as well as writing a paper based 
on substantive historical research. 3 credits. 

HIS 485. SR PROJECT IN PUBLIC HIST 

Students develop and produce an extensive public history project that 
preserves or interprets some element of local or regional history. Students 
work with a faculty member in conceiving and carrying out the project, 
often collaboratively with a regional institution or organization. 3 credits. 

HIS 490. SENIOR THESIS 

Directed research, study and writing on a specific topic that leads to the 
completion of a scholarly work based upon original sources or a similar work 
of public history. Topics are often, though not always, chosen from research 
sources in the region. The thesis experience emphasizes the use of primary 
sources as well as the arts of organizing and writing history. All thesis 
projects must be approved and on file with the thesis director prior to 
registering for Senior Thesis. 3 credits. 

HMC 205. PRIN OF MTGS & CONVENTION MGMT 

HMC 205 is a comprehensive analysis of the meetings and convention 
industry. Each market segment is examined in depth and its relationship to 
other segments is explored. How the meetings and conventions business 

contributes to hospitality profitability are analyzed. Each student will be 
given the opportunity to practice event planning by developing a special 
event contract. Site selection, room setup, food and beverage requirements, 
and attendee expectations are identified. 3 credits. 

HMC 215. CONVENTION AND TRADE SHOW MGMT 

HMC 215 is a comprehensive study of trade shows, operations of trade 
shows and how they are used as a marketing tool. Course topics include: 
facility selection budgeting, exhibit management, booth designs and 
working with convention services personnel. Field trip(s) may be required. 
Prerequisite: HMC 205. 3 credits. 

HMC 305. CATERING MGMT & OPERATIONS 

Catering management is one of the fastest growing segments of the food 
and beverage industry. HMC 305 is designed to provide participants with an 
in-depth overview of the key elements in hotel and independent catering, 
as well as looking closely at off-premise catering. The areas of study include 
marketing, letters of agreement, contracts, ethics, client relations, working 
with other departments in a hotel facility, catering functions, room setup, 
staffing and financial controls, as well as differences in off-premise catering. 
Practical experience is integrated into this course. Prerequisite: HMC 205. 3 
credits. 

HMC 315. PROMO STRA FOR MTGS & CONV 

HMC 315 studies and analyzes the concept that meetings and conventions 
are products which can be promoted and marketed. Analysis and controls of 
variables in the marketing mix are discussed from the perspective of the 
meeting planner whose responisbilites also includes the marketing of the 
meeting/convention. Event marketing, promotion, planning and campaigns 
are explored for events such as meetings, corporate events, professional 
conferences, community functions and sponsorship. To the extent feasible, 
the student will be provided opportunities for practical involvement in the 
planning and implementation of a promotional campaign for an event. 
Prerequisite: HMC 205. 3 credits. 

HMC 425. WEDDING PLANNING 

HMC 425 is designed to introduce and analyze the planning and managing 
of weddings. The social, political, economic, religious and cultural 
influences on wedding planning decisions and business strategies will be 
discussed. Practices relevant to successful wedding planning and 
consultancy for diverse clients and settings will be reviewed. Prerequisites: 
HMC 205; HMC 325. 3 credits. 

HMG 322. CLUB MANAGEMENT 

HMG 322 studies the unique operation of private clubs including but not 
limited to city clubs, country clubs, military clubs and athletic clubs. Analysis 
and discussion of private club personnel practices, financing, cost control 
(food, beverage and labor), communications, public relations, marketing, 
sports (golf), and security problems will be a primary focus of HMG 322. 
Field trip(s) to regional clubs will be required. 3 credits. 

HRIM 100. INTRO HOSPITALITY INDUSTRY 

HRIM 100 is designed to familiarize the student with the history of the 
hospitality industry, the many components that make up the hospitality 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 206 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


industry, hospitality industry trends, the support services to the hospitality 
industry, and the services required by customers. Hospitality industry 
divisions and career paths will be highlighted. Minimal travel fees may be 
associated with the course. Prerequisite: HM majors, freshmen and 
sophomores intersted in exploring the HM major, or by permission. 3 credits. 

HRIM 101. APPLIED SERVICE METH 

This course is designed to give a hands-on introduction to front of the house 
restaurant operations. This lab, taught in the Marriott Cafe facility, covers 
topics such as host/hostess training, waiter/waitress training, 
American/French/Russian service, front of the house tableware/equipment, 
and buffets/banquets. This course should be completed during the student’s 
freshman year. For a transfer student, it should be completed as soon as 
possible upon transferring. Lab fee. Uniform required. 1 credit. 

HRIM 110. SANITATION & SAFETY 

This course will expose the student to the basic principles of sanitation and 
safety as they apply to the food service industry. Upon successful completion 
of the course, each student will receive a certificate from the National 
Registry of Food Safety Professionals signifying that he/she is NRFSP 
certified. Must be a declared HM major. Instructor permission. 2 credits. 

HRIM 175. HOSPITALITY ENGINEERING 

HRIM 175 is a practical study into hospitality facility engineering. This course 
will analyze and focus on facility engineering management, the engineering 
systems, the maintenance requirements, the sustainability requirements, 
and the sanitation requirements of the hospitality facility. It helps build a 
strong working relationship between the hospitality manager and repair 
personnel, maintenance personnel, architects, contractors, equipment 
suppliers and health authorities. The effect of facility maintenance and 
hospitality guests will be highlighted and emphasized. 3 credits. 

HRIM 201. HOTEL ROOMS MANAGEMENT 

The emphasis of HRIM 201 is to introduce the hospitality student to the 
fundamentals and operation of the hotel rooms division from a managerial 
perspective. This management perspective will include analysis and focus on 
how the different departments (housekeeping, front office, accounting, 
sales and marketing, and human resources, etc.) within the hotel interact 
and why coordination, communication, recordkeeping and management are 
so important to the success of the most profitable division of the hotel. 
Prerequisite: ACCT 101. 3 credits. 

HRIM 212. PURCHASING FOR HOSP IND 

This course takes a managerial approach to the purchasing function. HRIM 
212 studies purchasing objectives, department organization, cost controls 
and purchasing supervision. It also provides product information on food 
and nonfood items used in the hospitality and other related industries. 3 
credits. 

HRIM 234. INTRO FOOD SERVICE MGMT 

HRIM 234 will overview the history and analyze the activities required for 
successful commercial food preparation/production. The course will 
emphasize the activities of food selection, food preparation, commercial 
equipment operation and sanitation. Also, HRIM 234 will provide students 

with basic culinary skills, food science principles, and the social, professional 
and technical aspects of commercial food preparation that prepare the 
student for an advanced level of food service production and management. 
Prerequisite: HRIM 110. Corequisite: HRIM 235. 3 credits. 

HRIM 235. INTRO FOOD SVC MGMT LAB 

Lab time emphasizes techniques discussed in lecture. Professional attire 
required for all hospitality students in Marriott Café facility. Corequisite: 
HRIM 234. Lab Fee. 1 credit. 

HRIM 240. CASINO & GAMING OPER MGMT 

HRIM 240 will include the history of gaming, the popularity of gaming, an 
examination of casino games, and the impact, both economically and 
socially, that gaming has on a community. Field trip(s) may be required. HM 
majors or by permission. 3 credits. 

HRIM 260. HOSPITALITY MKTG & SALES 

HRIM 260 focuses on the study of marketing the hospitality industry. This 
course examines the components of hospitality marketing including; trends, 
segments, theory, practice, and their applications in the hospitality industry. 
In addition, HRIM 260 focuses on various means of improving a hospitality 
firm’s image, sales and profits. Students will be given the opportunity to 
develop marketing strategies and tactics through participating in a 
marketing research project and through the preparation and class 
presentation of a fundamental marketing plan for a hospitality firm. Course 
learning objectives will be presented through lectures, readings, written/inclass 
exercises, and video cases (used to illustrate industry differences and 
the relevance of certain marketing principles and skills). Prerequisites: HRIM 
100, HRIM 201, MKTG 162. 3 credits. 

HRIM 306. WINE & SPIRIT MGMT 

This course studies and analyzes the principles of modern beverage 
management, marketing, and controls. Students will study the production 
and flavor of wine, spirits and beer in depth, and the role that these 
beverages play in the hospitality industry. Topics include liability, licensing, 
marketing and wine list creation. Visitations to regional wineries, 
distilleries, breweries and restaurants are scheduled based on availability; 
minimal travel fees may be required. Students will be certified through 
Responsible Alcohol Management Program (RAMP) training as part of the 
course. 3 credits. 

HRIM 380. HOSPITALITY LAW 

HRIM 380 analyzes and examines the increasingly complex aspects of 
hospitality law, government regulations, insurance, administrative laws, 
and how they impact the hospitality industry. Legal principles and 
precedents as they apply to the hospitality industry as a whole, as well as 
application to meetings and conventions, are highlighted and discussed. 3 
credits. 

HRIM 401. HOSP MGMT COST CONTROLS 

HRIM 401 is the practical study of management’s use of accounting, 
financial and operational data in pinpointing problems and in making 
decisions in planning, budgeting and internal cost control. HRIM 401 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 207 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


includes a study of the hospitality industry’s uniform system of accounts and 
makes industry comparisons. Prerequisite: ACCT 101. 3 credits. 

HRIM 405. INTERNATIONAL CUISINE 

HRIM 405 is an upper level elective course geared toward the instuction of 
preparing European cuisines. The student will create and prepare several 
theme dinners for small and large groups. Prerequisites: HRIM 234, HRIM 

235. HM major. 4 credits. 
HRIM 416. MIXOLOGY 

HRIM 416 is a lecture-laboratory course intended to acquaint the student 
with the fundamentals of mixology and bartending, and develop skills 
necessary for the proper preparation of mixed drinks. The course focuses on 
basic terminology, service standards, bartending duties, product 
knowledge, sales transactions and operations as well as practicing drink 
preparation. Students will be certified through Responsible Alcohol 
Management Program (RAMP) training as part of the course. 3 credits. 

HRIM 417. ADVANCED HOTEL OPERATIONS 

As the greatest revenue-producing department in the hotel, the front office 
relies on successful management strategies and accurate information for 
daily decision making. HRIM 417 students will focus on yield management 
techniques, hospitality industry operating ratios, occupancy forecasts, and 
key budget variables. Management decision-making cases/experiences in 
the areas of room inventory, staffing, guest satisfaction, and rate and 
occupancy mix are analyzed. Reporting functions and property management 
systems are examined and presented as crucial tools for operations 
management at the property and regional levels. Prerequisites: HRIM 201, 
FPM 209, and HRIM 260. 3 credits. 

HRIM 434. ADVANCED FOOD SVC MGMT 

HRIM 434 builds upon the principles derived from Intro to Food Service 
Management with application to a quantity food service environment. 
Topics covered include menu planning, costing, pricing and production 
scheduling. In HRIM 434, the student will progress to managing the Marriott 
Cafe, an actual food service operation located on campus. This capstone 
course gives the student the platform to practice and apply management 
principles covered in lectures, through managing an actual food service 
operation open to the public. During the course, all students will be given 
both “front-of-the-house” and “back-of-the-house” management 
responsibilities. Prerequisites: HRIM 234, ACCT 101. Corequisite: HRIM 435. 
3 credits. 

HRIM 435. ADVANCED FOOD SVC MGMT LAB 

HRIM 435 will provide students with extensive food preparation instruction 
though hands-on experience in quantity food production. In addition, the 
student will be responsible for management roles including kitchen 
manager, service manager, human resource manager, and revenue/cost 
manager. Since this lab serves the general public, students are required to 
conduct themselves in a timely and professional manner. Lab grade is 
dependent on attendance, performance and satisfactory completion of the 
management process. Prerequisite: HRIM 235. Corequisite: HRIM 434. 2 
credits. 

HRIM 450. SENIOR SEMINAR 

HRIM 450 is a senior-level capstone course designed to implement and test 
theories and practices learned in the hospitality core curriculum using actual 
consulting projects. Each group of students will consult and present findings 
to a client operating within the hospitality industry. In addition, case studies 
and presentations will enhance the learning experience. Field trips with 
overnight stays may be scheduled. Note: A senior comprehensive exam will 
be administered which covers all of the hospitality management core 
courses. All HM students must pass all sections of this exam to pass the 
course. Prerequisites: HM majors, senior standing only. 3 credits. 

HRIM 452. IND CONSULT/SPEAKER SERIES 

HRIM 452 brings to campus an outstanding array of known industry 
professionals to meet and address students on industry consulting, trends, 
research, and problem solving for businesses. HRIM 452 includes, but is not 
limited to, the hospitality industry. Industry professionals may provide 
expert advice and interact with students and faculty in other settings such as 
a speaker series, informal discussions and classroom visits. 0-3 credits. 

HRIM 455. HRIM SERVICE PRACTICUM 

This service hour practicum is required of all students completing a major in 
Hospitality Management. All Hospitality Management majors must 
complete 200+ service hours over their enrollment in the program. Credits 
may granted in the final term, prior to graduation, if the student chooses to 
earn credits towards graduation. 3 credits. 

HRIM 473. HOSPITALITY MGMT INTERN 

HRIM 473 offers the student an individual work experience in the Hospitality 
Industry. The student is provided on-the-job training (coordinated and 
supervised by the Career Services Department) while enrolled in HRIM 473. 
Prerequisites: Department permission, junior standing, 2.5 GPA in HM 
courses. 0-3 credits. 

HRIM 475. HRIM INTERNSHIP 

HRIM 475 offers the student with an individual work experience in the 
Hospitality Industry. The student is provided on-the-job training 
(coordinated and supervised by the Career Services Department) while 
enrolled in HRIM 475. Prerequisites: Department permission, junior 
standing, 2.5 GPA in HM courses. 3 credits. 

HRIM 476. HRIM INTERNSHIP 

HRIM 476 offers the student with an individual work experience in the 
Hospitality Industry. The student is provided on-the-job training 
(coordinated and supervised by the Career Services Department) while 
enrolled in HRIM 476. Prerequisites: Department permission, junior 
standing, 2.5 GPA in HM courses. 6 credits. 

ID 100. DESIGN BASICS & STUDIO 

Students will explore the elements and principles of design in a studio 
format. Emphasis will be placed on the artistic creation and analysis of 
design composition that are grounded in design fundamentals. Two-
dimensional and three-dimensional interpretations and expressions will be 
explored as they pertain to the elements of line, shape, form, mass, texture, 
space, light, color, and motion, the principles of emphasis, balance, scale, 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 208 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


proportion, rhythm, unity, variety, harmony, and visual perception and 
design theory. 3 credits. 

ID 102. WESTERN FENG SHUI* 

The course will allow students to explore more deeply the western 
application of the ancient art and science of Feng Shui in today’s global 
market. Designers and non-designers are often fascinated with Feng Shui 
but have a misunderstanding of its origins, transmission through ancient 
Chinese literature and the archeological evidence that drives its practice 
today on an international level. Students will actively engage in applying 
Feng Shui principles and practices to both residential and commercial 
interior environments, including analysis of existing spaces on and off 
campus. 3 credits. 

ID 105. TECHNICAL GRAPHICS I 

This course will introduce students to the fundamentals of architectural 
drawing and drafting, and model making. Students will acquire skill in the 
use of drafting equipment and the application of architectural symbols. 3 
credits. 

ID 107. INTRO TO INTERIOR DESIGN 

Students are provided with an introduction to the profession of interior 
design and acquire beginning studio experiences in a wide range of design 
practices and methodologies. Students explore the history of interior design, 
design process, design theory, the elements and principles of design, the 
relationship of interiors to the built structure, space planning, and the 
relationship of color, light and materials to interior environments. This 
course emphasizes aesthetic, functional, and sustainable qualities of the 
built environment and explores the profession’s social responsibility and 
role in environmental concerns. 3 credits. 

ID 111. INTERIOR DESIGN STUDIO I 

Students are provided with and introduction to the design process and will 
acquire studio experience in applying fundamental design elements and 
principles to two and three dimensional design solutions. This studio 
emphasizes the development of space planning and problem solving skills 
related to single and multi-family dwellings. Studio experiences will be 
taught in the theory of the design process and an understanding of design 
research involving physical, social, and psychological factors and reflect a 
concern for the aesthetic, functional and sustainable qualities of the built 
environment. Specific in-depth emphasis will be placed on the study of 
design for the private special populations. 3 credits. 

ID 130. DIGITAL GRAPHICS INT DES 

This course is an overview of basic Adobe Creative Suite Design and its 
functions—focusing on Adobe InDesign, Adobe Photoshop, and design 
principles. It is the goal of this course to show the student the process of 
putting graphic layout pieces together using the correct software for the 
correct part of the process. Students learn the differences between vector 
and raster images, basic typography, font usage, layout principles, e-
publishing processes and functions using Adobe Acrobat. This course 
culminates in producing monograms/logos, photo editing, color correction, 
cropping and other photo functions using Photoshop and producing layout 
boards, personal stationary and displays using InDesign. This course will 

show students how to render three-dimensional spaces using Photoshop, 
and Interior Architecture presentations boards. 3 credits. 

ID 200. BUILDING TECHNOLOGY 

This course surveys residential and commercial building systems. Technical 
information is presented regarding the building and its environment, 
structural systems, mechanical systems (electrical, plumbing, heating and 
ventilation, fire safety systems, etc.) and acoustical systems. The role of 
government regulation, energy efficiency and handicap accessibility is 
examined. 3 credits. 

ID 205. TECHNICAL GRAPHICS II 

This course builds on basic technical graphic skills through the introduction 
of computer-aided drafting, primarily by use of AutoCAD 2016. The class will 
be taught through a combination of lecture instruction and lab activities 
to introduce the student to computer-based design. This will include a basic 
understanding of the software tools and applications to further develop the 
student’s design skills and presentation methods. Prerequisite: ID 105. 3 
credits. 

ID 210. INTERIOR DESIGN GRAPHICS 

Professional methods of preparing visual presentations of interior design 
projects are examined. Students acquire specific skills in color and black and 
white expressive skills and rendering techniques, manually. 3 credits. 

ID 211. INTERIOR DESIGN STUDIO II 

This studio will emphasize the development of space planning and problem 
solving skills related to corporate offices and manufacturing facilities. Studio 
experiences will be taught in the theory of the design process and an 
understanding of design research involving physical, social, and 
psychological factors and reflect a concern for the aesthetic qualities of the 
built environment. Emphasis will be placed on the study of design for 
corporate and industrial interiors such as: offices, financial institutions, 
factories, manufacturing plants laboratories, garages, warehouses and 
workshops. 3 credits. 

ID 220. HIST INT DESIGN&ARCH I 

This course provides a study of the history of furniture, interior design and 
architectural design traced from antiquity to modern times. Socio-cultural, 
political and economic factors are considered in relation to their influence on 
design motifs, styles and trends. 3 credits. 

ID 221. HIST INT DESIGN&ARCH II 

This course provides a study contemporary interior design surveyed from the 
end of the 19th century to the present day. Specific designers and 
movements are studied and socio-cultural influences on motifs, styles and 
trends are considered. 3 credits. 

ID 230. INT FINISH,MATERIAL&FURN I 

This course provides a study of the materials, systems, assemblies and 
products used in interior environments. Product performance, regulations, 
standards, and performance testing are explored. Special emphasis is placed 
on product and material specification, sustainability, and LEED certification 
of buildings and processes. 3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 209 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


ID 231. HUMAN FACTORS DESIGN 

This course emphasizes how human performance, health, safety and 
behaviors are influenced by the design of work, play and living 
environments. Students will gain an understanding of how the work of 
interior design is informed by knowledge of the sciences with emphasis on 
the behavioral sciences and human factors. Students will further explore 
and understand the design of the built environment in an ecological, socioeconomic, 
and cultural context with emphasis on evidence-based research 
and design. Students will be provided with analytical tools with which to 
assess and recommend for change the elements of an interior environment 
that do not support the health, safety and performance of the users of the 
space. 3 credits. 

ID 311. ID STUDIO III-HEALTH&REC 

This studio will emphasize the development of space planning and problem-
solving skills related to health care, sports and fitness facilities. Studio 
experiences will be taught in the theory of the design process and an 
understanding of design research involving physical, social, and 
psychological factors and reflect a concern for the aesthetic qualities of the 
built environment. Specific in-depth emphasis will be placed on the study of 
design for a health care or recreational facility. Areas of health care and 
recreation that may be addressed in the course of study include hospitals, 
clinics, nursing homes, doctors’ offices, freestanding emergency centers, 
health and fitness centers, gymnasiums, swimming pools, etc. Prerequisite: 
ID 211. 3 credits. 

ID 320. FURNITURE DESIGN 

A study of the history, theory, materials and construction techniques of 
furniture design. Wood detailing for architectural interiors is also explored. 
Field studies are conducted at several furniture manufacturers and millwork 
shops. Projects focus on materials selection, design development and 
drawing skills. 3 credits. 

ID 322. INTERIOR DESIGN STUDIO IV 

This studio will emphasize the development of space planning and problem-
solving related to retail stores, restaurants and lodging facilities. Studio 
experiences will be taught in the theory of the design process and an 
understanding of design research involving physical, social and 
psychological factors and will reflect a concern for the aesthetic qualities of 
the built environment. Specific in-depth emphasis will be placed on the 
study of design for hotel rooms, restaurants and retail locations/stores. 
Other areas of study may include malls, showrooms, galleries, eateries, 
resorts, clubs, theaters, concert halls, auditoriums, arenas and convention 
centers. Prerequisites: ID 111 and ID 405. 3 credits. 

ID 332. INTERIOR DESIGN STUDIO V 

This studio will emphasize the development of space planning and problem-
solving skills related to institutional and governmental facilities. Studio 
experiences will be taught in the theory of the design process and an 
understanding of design research involving physical, social and 
psychological factors and reflect a concern for the aesthetic qualities of the 
built environment. Emphasis will be placed on the program development 
for design of the following types of institutions: schools, colleges, 

universities, libraries, museums, city halls, courthouses, legislative, post 
offices, etc. 3 credits. 

ID 375. BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE FOR ID 

This course provides students a thorough study of business practices and 
professionalism within the interior design industry. Emphasis is placed on 
business and professional practices including professional ethics, project 
management, project communication, financial management, industry 
relationships, and project assessment. Interior design organizations, legal 
recognition of the profession, and related professions and disciplines are 
examined in the context of current design practices. 3 credits. 

ID 380. COLOR AND LIGHT 

A study of the technical and creative concepts of light and color for interior 
spaces. Human factors, space planning, materials specification and the 
behavior of light and color are explored. Energy efficiency and maintenance 
issues are also studied. Projects focus on development of interior lighting, 
color plans and specifications. 3 credits. 

ID 405. TECHNICAL GRAPHICS III 

This course builds on basic technical graphic skills through the introduction 
of computer-aided drafting, primarily by use of Revit 2016 and SketchUp 
Pro. The class will be taught through a combination of lecture instruction 
and lab activities to introduce the student to computer-based design, 3-D 
modeling, and rendering software. This will include a basic understanding 
of the software tools and applications to further develop the student’s 
design skills and presentation methods. 3 credits. 

ID 340. Environmental Deisgn I 

This course addresses the interaction of the built environment with the 
natural environment, specifically in the context of how buildings affect the 
health, safety, and sustainability of man and nature. Students will explore 
and understand the design of the built environment in an ecological context 
using evidence-based research as well as traditional methods. Students will 
be provided with analytical tools with which to assess and make 
recommendations for environmental modifications to the built 
environment. Emphasis will be placed on design strategies that support and 
enhance sustainability. 3 credits. 

ID 406. Technical Graphics IV 

As an endeavor into advanced graphics, this course will explore various 
design software and media to create a well-rounded approach to design 
conception, planning, implementation, and documentation. This course will 
be a guide line on how to present interior architecture project. Graphical 
visualization is the main scope of this course. This course builds on basic 
technical graphic skills through the introduction of computer-aided drafting, 
primarily by use of Revit 2016 and SketchUp Pro and Lumion. 3 credits. 

LATN 101. INTRO TO LATIN I 

An introduction to the Latin language, including the development of the 
basic skills of readings and writing. Study and analysis of simple texts, as 
well as the fundamentals of Roman life and literature. 3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 210 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


LATN 102. INTRO TO LATIN II 

Students continue the study of language skills to improve their reading and 
writing of Latin texts. The study and analysis of more complex texts, as well 
as an investigation of Roman life and literature. Prerequisite: LATN 102 or 
equivalent. 3 credits. 

LATN 203. INTERMEDIATE LATIN I 

An intensive study of the sophisticated grammatical patterns and idiomatic 
structures of Latin, designed to increase proficiency in reading and writing 
the language. Readings will focus on the history and culture of Rome during 
the early years of the empire. The grammar concepts will include the 
complete conjugations of verbs, as well as constructions peculiar to Latin, 

e.g. ablative absolute and indirect statements. This course should cover 
most of the grammar necessary for students to read the Latin of most 
Roman authors. For students with 3-4 years of prior study. Prerequisite: 
LATN 202 or equivalent. 3 credits. 
MATH 099. BASIC MATHEMATICS 

This course emphasizes the acquisition and development of basic 
mathematical, geometric and algebraic skills. This course involves teaching 
the skills of problem solving; the skills for interpreting data involving graphs 
and tables; and the skills for working with basic algebra. Credits do not 
count toward graduation. 3 credits. 

MATH 102. ELEMENTARY ALGEBRA 

The course deals with the fundamental operations of algebra and the 
applications of these operations. Number systems, fractions, linear 
equations, linear inequalities, graphs, exponents and polynomial 
expressions are studied. No student with two or more years of secondary 
mathematics should take this course. Does not satisfy the Analytical 
Thought category of REACH. 3 credits. 

MATH 110. MATHEMATICS APPLICATIONS 

Mathematics Applications invites students to experience mathematics in the 
context of its relationship to a single field of application, such as Art, Music, 
Sports, or Politics and Elections. Specifically, we will discuss functions, 
graphs, trigonometry, probability, statistics and logic. The goal is to help 
students see the extent to which mathematics is bound to areas of their 
interest and therefore awaken in them a new interest in the subject. 
Prerequisite: MATH Placement score of at least 30. 3 credits. 

MATH 111. COLLEGE ALGEBRA 

A course in algebra fundamentals, topics include sets, relations, functions, 
exponents and radicals, equations, inequalities, and polynomial and rational 
functions. Prerequisite: MATH Placement score of at least 46. 3 credits. 

MATH 112. TRIGONOMETRY & FUNCTIONS 

This course will include a further exploration of functions, exponential 
functions, logarithmic functions, trigonometry functions and additional 
topics in trigonometry. A student may take MATH 112 without taking MATH 

111. The student must have knowledge of the topics listed in MATH 111. 
Prerequisite: MATH 111 or MATH Placement score of at least 61. 3 credits. 
MATH 118. MATH FOR NATURAL SCIENCE 

This course has been designed for students who wish to take calculus or 
physics, but who are not prepared for college calculus based on our 
mathematics placement score and department recommendation. This 
course is a one semester replacement for the two semester combination of 
College Algebra and Trigonometry and Functions. Topics will include 
fundamental concepts of college algebra, pre-calculus, and a preparation for 
calculus. More specifically, the topics will include factoring, integer and 
rational exponents, simplifying algebraic expressions, function notation, 
polynomial and rational functions. While many of the topics covered are 
similar to those in typical college pre-calculus courses, there is more 
theoretical coverage and emphasis, a faster pace is maintained, a greater 
depth of understanding is required and additional material on applications 
is taught. Prerequisite: MATH Placement score of at least 54. 4 credits. 

MATH 146. PROGRAMMING I 

An introduction to computer programming, with an emphasis on the 
development of good programming habits and skills utilizing Python an 
object-oriented language. Topics will include programming basics such as 
loops, decisions, lists, functions, file I/O, arrays, objects, classes, inheritance. 
Prerequisite: MATH Placement score of at least 46. 4 credits. 

MATH 150. LINEAR ALGEBRA 

This course is an introduction to the algebra and geometry of Euclidean 3space 
and its extensions to Euclidean N-Space. Topics included are systems 
of linear equations, determinants, vectors, bases, linear transformations and 
matrices. Prerequisite: MATH 170. 4 credits. 

MATH 160. BUSINESS/APPLIED CALCULUS 

This is a one-semester course in calculus for non-science majors. Topics 
included are: functions, limits, continuity, derivatives and their applications, 
integrals and their applications, exponential and logarithmic functions. 
Prerequisite: MATH Placement score of at least 61 or MATH 111. 3 credits. 

MATH 170. CALCULUS I 

This is the initial course in a sequence of courses on the fundamental ideas 
of the calculus of one variable intended for science and mathematics majors. 
It is here that truly significant applications of mathematics begin. Topics 
follow the early transcendentals path, included are functions, continuity, 
limits, derivatives, maxima and minima and antiderivatives and an 
introduction to integration. Prerequisite: MATH 118 or MATH Placement 
score of at least 76. 4 credits. 

MATH 171. CALCULUS II 

Any student who has completed Calculus I should take Calculus II to obtain a 
complete study of the calculus of one variable. Topics follow the early 
transcendentals path, included are the integral, anti-derivatives, the 
Fundamental Theorem, integration techniques, interesting applications of 
integration, an introduction to differential equations, series, sequences. 
Prerequisite: MATH 170. 4 credits. 

MATH 201. Technical Writing with LaTeX 

Students learn how to write technical documents, articles and theses using 
the LaTeX document preparation system. The course will progress from 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 211 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


leaning the basics of how LaTeX works and how to get started, to writing 
mathematical formulas, lists, tabular information, cross-referencing, 
creating and using illustrations and graphics, presentations, and 
troubleshooting LaTeX errors. Students are required to install LaTeX on a 
computer in order to complete assignments. 3 credits. 

MATH 209. STATISTICS II 

This course is a continuation of Statistics I. Sampling methods, design of 
experiments, and multiple regression are the topics which will be the focus 
of the course. Prerequisite: STAT 109. 3 credits. 

MATH 233. CALCULUS III 

This is an introduction to the calculus of several variables. Topics selected 
from polar coordinates, functions of several variables, partial derivatives, 
multiple integrals, line integrals, surface integrals, Green's theorem and 
Stokes' theorem. Prerequisite: MATH 171. 4 credits. 

MATH 240. DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS 

An introduction to the basic mathematical content of ordinary differential 
equations and their applications. This will include analytical, qualitative, 
and numerical methods for ordinary differential equations. Topics include 
first-order and second-order equations and applications, systems of 
differential equations, and matrix methods for linear systems. Prerequisites: 
MATH 150, MATH 171, or Department Permission. 3 credits. 

MATH 245. GEOMETRY 

Emphasis in this course will be an axiomatic approach to the familiar 
geometry of Euclid, and how that approach historically produced other 
geometries. Several of these geometries will be explored, including finite 
geometries, projective geometry, and non-Euclidean geometries. The 
following topics are integrated into the course: comparisons of various 
geometries, historical aspects of geometry, reading and writing of 
geometric proofs, and the use of dynamic software packages. Prerequisite: 
MATH 265. 3 credits. 

MATH 250. NUMERICAL METHODS 

This course will teach the student how to use programming skills together 
with mathematical software to efficiently solve a variety of problems. The 
primary programming language will be using the MATLAB environment. 
This approach will prepare the student for occasions where programming is 
required as well as the ability to utilize software packages such as MATLAB. 
A secondary objective is learning to use the markup language LaTeX. Having 
a laptop computer is not required but may be of great benefit for this course. 
Prerequisites: MATH 150, MATH 233, MATH 146. 3 credits. 

MATH 265. TRANSITION TO ADV MATH 

This course is designed to facilitate the mathematics student’s transition to 
courses requiring a higher level of mathematical maturity. Emphasis will be 
on the reading and writing of proofs, and on communicating 
mathematically—both orally and in writing. Topics will include logic, set 
theory, functions, relations, and number theory. Prerequisites: MATH 150, 
MATH 171. 3 credits. 

MATH 280. MODERN ALGEBRA I 

This is the first semester of a year-long sequence on the study of algebraic 
structures. Course topics include the properties of numbers, equivalence 
relations, groups, rings, fields, direct products, homomorphisms and 
isomorphisms, and the natural development of various number systems. 
Prerequisites: MATH 150, MATH 233, MATH 265. 3 credits. 

MATH 281. MODERN ALGEBRA II 

This second semester course will build on material from Math 280, with a 
focus on integral domains, polynomial rings, and fields. Additional topics 
will include the Sylow theorems, finite simple groups, symmetry and 
patterns, and an introduction to Galois theory. Prerequisite: MATH 280. 3 
credits. 

MATH 290. PROBABILITY THEORY 

An introduction to the mathematical theory of probability including 
continuous distributions. Topics included are sample spaces; events; the 
algebra of events; combinatorial theory; probability distributions; binomial, 
hypergeometric, and Poisson distribution; probability densities; uniform, 
exponential, gamma, and normal distribution; mathematical expectation; 
multivariate distribution; Chebyshev’s Theorem; Law of Large Numbers. 
Prerequisite: MATH 171. 3 credits. 

MATH 291. STATISTICAL ANALYSIS 

An introduction to statistical concepts and techniques with emphasis on the 
underlying probability theoretical basis. Topics included are sums of random 
variables; moment generating functions; sampling distributions; F-and t-
distributions; chi-square; point estimation; interval estimation; testing 
hypotheses, theory, and application; regression and correlation; analysis of 
variance. Prerequisites: MATH 150, MATH 233. 3 credits. 

MATH 370. ADVANCED CALCULUS 

This course introduces the fundamental concepts of a function of a real 
variable from a rigorous point of view. Topics included are completion of the 
rational numbers, theory of continuous functions, theory of differentiation, 
theory of the Riemann integral, sequences, series. Prerequisites: MATH 150, 
MATH 233, MATH 265. 3 credits. 

MATH 400. TOPICS IN MATHEMATICS 

Additional studies in mathematics can be arranged through independent 
study. Some possible areas for further study are abstract algebra, geometry, 
topology, real analysis and complex variables. At least one topics course is 
desirable for anyone wishing to pursue mathematics in graduate school. 
Prerequisite: MATH 265. 3 credits. 

MGMT 120. PRINCIPLES OF MANAGEMENT 

An introduction designed to provide a basic understanding of the principles, 
concepts and functions of management: planning, organizing, leading and 
controlling with an emphasis on managing and being managed. 3 credits. 

MGMT 206. HUMAN RESOURCE MGMT 

Examination of the basic personnel processes involved in the selection, 
development and maintenance of human resources. Emphasis on 
managerial and legal requirements. Prerequisite: MGMT120. 3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 212 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


MGMT 226. HUMAN BEHAVIOR IN ORG 

A study of the individual as a functioning member of groups and 
organizations. Topics include organizational culture, motivation, group 
dynamics, communication, leadership and conflict. Prerequisite: MGMT120. 
3 credits. 

MGMT 290. MERGERS & ACQUISITIONS 

A general overview of all aspects of corporate mergers and acquisitions 
beginning with a survey of the most common type of transactions in 
medium-sized corporations, including recast financial analysis, return on 
investment analysis, minority and liquidity discount applications and the 
psychological and negotiation tactics of the deal. The second half of the 
course will deal with mergers in the public corporation sector, including 
hostile takeovers. Prerequisite: ACCT 101. 3 credits. 

MGMT 316. LABOR/MANAGEMENT RELATIONS 

A historical, legal, and economic examination of conflict in 
labor/management relations. Topics covered include collective bargaining 
strategies and tactics, structure and operation of unions, and economic 
constraints on collective bargaining. 3 credits. 

MGMT 340. RECRUITMENT & SELECTION 

This course examines the process of selection in today’s modern business 
organizations. The student will be involved in analyzing methods of 
recruitment in order to procure a qualified pool of candidates from which a 
selection will be made. The students will investigate the job analysis process 
and its role in selection. Tools, such as application forms, interviews and 
tests, used in the selection process will be investigated. This course will 
show methodology by giving the student a complete presentation of the 
selection process, starting with recruitment. Prerequisite: MGMT 206. 3 
credits. 

MGMT 345. TRAINING & DEVELOPMENT 

This course exposes students to different types of training and development 
at all levels of employment. The student will be introduced to concepts that 
demonstrate the significance of training and developing employee skills. 
This course will help students determine which training methods are most 
appropriate for achieving particular objectives and shows the link between 
training objectives, training methods and training evaluation. Students will 
learn how to identify and write training objectives. Prerequisite: MGMT 206. 
3 credits. 

MGMT 405. QUALITY LEADERSHIP 

The understanding of the leadership process is fundamental to being an 
effective manager in any organization. This course will focus on the different 
dimensions of leadership by focusing on historical leaders in business and 
society and the interactional framework of leadership to get a 
comprehensive understanding of the different dynamics of the process of 
being an effective leader in an organization. Historical and current leader 
profiles will highlight the different philosophies of leadership. Focus will be 
placed on not only the leader themselves but also the characteristics of the 
followers and the situation/environment in which the leadership takes 
place. Prerequisites: MGMT 120, MGMT 206, MGMT 226. 3 credits. 

MGMT 475. MANAGEMENT INTERNSHIP 

An individual work-study experience in an approved business institution. 
Placement of a qualified student in a business setting which involves an area 
of interest, provides training and on-the-job learning, and prepares the 
student for business practice. Junior standing, 2.75 GPA in required business 
courses, and written permission of the program director or associate dean. 3 
credits. 

MGMT 476. HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT INTERNSHIP 

An individual work-study experience in an approved business institution. 
Placement of a qualified student in a business setting which involves an area 
of interest, provides training and on-the-job learning, and prepares the 
student for business practice. Junior standing, 2.75 GPA in required business 
courses, and written permission of the program director or associate dean. 3 
or 6 credits. 3 credits. 

MIS 110. ADVANCED COMPUTER APPS 

This course focuses on the use of spreadsheets and databases to manage 
information. Topics studied include systems analysis, basic database design, 
and applications development using Microsoft Excel and Access. 
Prerequisite: Word and Excel basics. 3 credits. 

MIS 120. INTRO PROG WITH 3D ANIMATN 

This course is an introduction to programming through 3D animation. 
Students will create their own elementary games and animations using the 
Alice language, and in the process they will learn the fundamentals of 
object-based programming. Topics include storyboarding, thinking in 3D, 
camera control, variables, functions, methods, logic, lists, events, 
interaction, and recursion. This course is open to all students. No prior 
programming experience is required. 3 credits. 

MIS 130. 3D MODELING&ANIMATION I 

An introduction to 3D character modeling, rigging and animation. Topics 
include box and polygonal modeling, shape keys, armatures, inverse 
kinematics, parenting and weight painting, lip syncing key framing, walk 
cycles, acting for animation, and elementary video editing. Students will 
produce their own short animated movie. 3 credits. 

MIS 140. COMPUTER OPERATIONS 

This course introduces the basics of computer architecture and how the 
operating system enables it to function. Students will gain knowledge and 
skill in installing and configuring computer hardware components including 
drives, motherboards, memory, network/communications interfaces, 
printers and other peripherals. Students will work with latest Microsoft OS 
and be introduced to a Linux OS. Students will install and evaluate software. 
Students will use software utilities to do diagnostics, perform backups, and 
utilities for security and virus detection. 3 credits. 

MIS 150. INTRO TO DATA SCIENCE 

An introduction to Microsoft Excel and Access in a data science context. The 
focus will be on machine learning techniques, including cluster analysis, 
Naïve Bayes, and ensemble methods. 3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 213 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


MIS 155. BIOINFORMATICS PROGRAMMING 

An introductory course in Python programming with applications to biology, 
bioinformatics, and data science in general. Programming topics include 
functions, loops, if statements, recursion, lists, and dictionaries. Application 
topics include GC content of a DNA string, origin of pathogenicity, sequence 
alignment, phylogenetic trees, and genetic algorithms. 3 credits. 

MIS 180. LINUX 

Study of computer system administration using standalone and networked 
UNIX/Linux systems. Topics include system design and installation, file 
systems, BASH shell, user and process management, backup/restore, 
common administrative tasks, troubleshooting, and networking service 
administration. This course includes a lab intensive component. 3 credits. 

MIS 190. ALGORITHMS 

Introductory course surveying a variety of algorithm designs. Sorting 
algorithms, graph and tree algorithms, and asymptotic analysis of algorithm 
efficiency will be covered. Additional algorithm topics will be covered on a 
rotating basis, including matrix operation algorithms, combinatorial 
algorithms, cryptography algorithms, and computational complexity. No 
previous exposure to computer programming will be assumed. 
Prerequisites: None. 3 credits. 

MIS 224. MOBILE APPLICATION DEVELOP 

In this course, students will learn to design, program, and publish mobile 
apps for iOS (mobile Apple devices) and Android using the Corona SDK. 3 
credits. 

MIS 226. PROGRAMMING II 

This course focuses on object-oriented design and programming using data 
structures such as array-based lists, linked lists, stacks, queues, and trees 
implemented as abstract data types. Prerequisite: MATH 146. 3 credits. 

MIS 260. NETWORKS 

This is a course about the transmission and communication of data over a 
network. Topics include network hardware, the OSI reference model and 
TCP/IP working model, network protocols, Ethernet, IP addressing, data 
packets, subnets and virtual subnets, and sharing and management of 
network resources. Also included are the basics of cabling and wireless, and 
network design. The network software utilized includes the latest Microsoft 
server software, LDAP (active directory), TCP/IP client/server software, Linux 
network software and virtualization. Prerequisites: MIS 110, MIS 140. 3 
credits. 

MIS 280. INTRO INTERNET PROGRAMMING 

Students will learn HTML5 and CSS. All students will build syntactically valid 
websites on a live server with these two technologies, adhering to W3C 
standards while learning the web-development cycle. This course is taught 
as a programming course, not as web design. A complete coverage of 
HTML5 and a comprehensive coverage of the latest snapshot of CSS will 
allow students to hand code several sophisticated web projects that they 
can add to their department online portfolio. 4 credits. 

MIS 281. INTERNET PROGRAMMING II 

A continuation of MIS 280 with a further exploration of HTML5 and CSS. This 
will include the HTML5 DOM API's and many of the new CSS modules. Other 
topics will include CSS preprocessors, further responsive web design, CSS 
framework blueprints and examples, and scalar and modular architecture 
for CSS. Certain advanced topics, such as CSS frameworks, designing to a 
grid, CSS3, and web graphics may also be covered. Prerequisite: MIS 280. 3 
credits. 

MIS 305. GAME PROGRAMMING 

A first course in game programming with Unity. Topics include 3D concepts, 
scripting basics, environments, characters, interaction, collisions, triggers, 
rigid bodies, particle systems and animation. Prerequisite: MIS 120 or MATH 

146. 3 credits. 
MIS 350. DATABASE MANAGEMENT 

This is a study of the concepts, procedures, design, implementation and 
maintenance of a relational data base management system. Topics include 
normalization, database design, entity-relationship modeling, performance 
measures, data security, concurrence, integrity and Structured Query 
Language. MySQL will be the database management system used in this 
course. Prerequisite: MATH 146. 3 credits. 

MIS 370. CLIENT SIDE PROGRAMMING 

In this course, students will learn the fundamentals of client-side web 
programming, creating programs executed by the web browser to make 
dynamic web pages and sites. Separation of content, presentation and 
behavior will be a major theme of the course. JavaScript will be the 
language of choice, and the first half of the course will be focused on its 
basics. Topics will include statements and commands, data types and 
variables, arrays, strings, functions and programming logic. In the second 
half of the course, a JavaScript framework will be introduced, and the 
students will use it to make their webpages dynamic and interactive. Topics 
will include the Document Object Model, events, photo galleries, navigation, 
forms and Ajax. One popular JavaScript API, such as Google Maps, Google 
Earth or YouTube, may also be covered. Prerequisite: MIS 280. 4 credits. 

MIS 380. SERVER SIDE PROGRAMMING 

In this course, students will learn the fundamentals of server-side web 
programming, writing scripts and managing databases that generate 
dynamic web sites. The first part of the course will be focused on a server 
side scripting language and its basics. PHP will be the language of choice, 
and topics will include syntax, variables, strings, arrays, functions, logic, 
HTML forms, and includes. In the next part of the course, the students will 
learn the basics of SQL using the MySQL database, and in the last part of the 
course, PHP and MySQL will be used together. Topics will include e-
commerce, security, cookies and sessions. By the end of the course the 
students will have built complete applications on a live sever as part of their 
ongoing department online portfolio. Prerequisites: MIS 280, MIS 350. 4 
credits. 

MIS 403. SENIOR PROJECT 

This is a capstone course. Emphasis will be on present-day productivity 
tools. Students will construct complete operational systems using a 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 214 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


database environment whenever appropriate. Prerequisites: Senior 
Information Technology major, and permission of the department. 3 credits. 

MIS 462. DATAVISUAL W/JAVASCRIPT 

This course will explore several modern libraries specifically created for data 
visualization on the web. Students will create interactive, animated, and 
well-designed graphics that accurately and effectively depict a data set. 
JavaScript libraries studied are subject to change, but students will learn to 
create basic charts and graphs, radar charts, trees, word clouds, cartographs, 
and several other styles of visualization that complement their data. 3 
credits. 

MIS 475. MIS INTERNSHIP 

An individual working experience in an approved setting which utilizes 
information systems. Placements provide training and on-the-job education 
to prepare the student for work as a computer professional. 3 credits. 

MKTG 162. PRIN OF INTEGRATED MKTG 

A broad study of the field of marketing from a managerial and analytical 
perspective. Emphasis is on demand analysis, need satisfaction, strategic 
planning, product development, distribution channels, promotions, and 
price determination. 3 credits. 

MKTG 200. INTERNATIONAL MKTG MGMT 

This course deals with opportunities and challenges associated with the 
increasing globalization of markets. Topics covered include the 
environmental and cultural differences which shape the needs and 
preferences of global consumers, the impact of foreign political and 
economic factors on the marketing mix, the assessment of foreign markets, 
entry strategies, channel management, promoting internationally, and 
transfer pricing. Prerequisite: MKTG 162. 3 credits. 

MKTG 301. CONSUMER BEHAVIOR 

This course addresses the categories of consumers and provides an 
understanding of consumer behavior. Emphasis is placed on the consumer’s 
decision process and the internal and external factors that influence a 
consumer’s purchasing decisions. Prerequisite: MKTG 162. 3 credits. 

MKTG 317. SALES MANAGEMENT 

A study of contemporary sales management with an emphasis on sales 
strategy development and building a sales program. In addition, special 
attention will be devoted to improving the student’s personal selling skills. 
Prerequisite: MKTG 162. 3 credits. 

MKTG 347. ADVERTISING & BRANDING STRAT 

This course focuses on the creative and media components of advertising, 
marketing, and branding strategies. Emphasis will be placed on the 
customer’s role in the branding process, brand and product positioning, 
elements of a brand identity, and key communication messages. Students 
will develop decision making and analytical skills by developing a campaign 
for a local or national business. Prerequisite: MKTG 162. 3 credits. 

MKTG 357. MARKETING RESEARCH 

An analysis of research methods in marketing. Specific attention is given to 
problem definition, data gathering techniques, methods of analysis, 
decision theory, and the role of marketing research. Prerequisites: MKTG 
162, STAT 135. 3 credits. 

MKTG 406. MARKETING MANAGEMENT 

A managerial orientation to the analysis, planning, implementation, and 
control of marketing decisions. A case-oriented approach will emphasize 
managerial decision making and problem solving in the areas of product 
development, pricing, promotion, and distribution. Emphasis will also be 
placed on the development of marketing plans for a new product/ service. 
Topics will be addressed in a variety of diverse industries including health 
care, consumer products, and high tech. Prerequisites: ECON 106, MKTG 

357. 3 credits. 
MKTG 475. MARKETING INTERNSHIP 

An individual work-study experience in an approved business institution. 
Placement of a qualified student in a business setting which involves an area 
of interest, provides training and on-the-job learning, and prepares the 
student for business practice. Junior standing, 2.75 GPA in required business 
courses, and written permission of the program director or associate dean. 3 
credits. 

MUS 100. MUSIC IN SOCIETY 

An exploration of music from medieval chant through rock, and an 
examination of its impact on politics, culture, history and education. There is 
a strong emphasis on the acquisition of listening skills as the primary vehicle 
for fully comprehending musical meaning, style and form. The course is 
international in scope, including music traditions from around the world. 
Students are encouraged to reflect on music’s relevance to their studies at 
Mercyhurst and their daily lives. 3 credits. 

MUS 101/102. THEORY I & II 

An introductory study of basic music terminology, notational skills, melodic 
and harmonic writing and musical analysis. 3 credits. 

MUS 104/105. MUSIC HISTORY I & II 

Chronological study of Western music from antiquity to the present. 3 
credits. 

MUS 108. INTRO MUSIC TECHNOLOGY 

This course is designed to give the musician and educator an introduction to 
commonly used technologies. Included will be experiences with music 
notation and sequencing, basic web design, the internet, Power Point, 
digital recording, and basic video editing. The course is constructed to 
provide practical hands-on experiences, and the final project will result in a 
CD based web site containing each of the course's unit assignments. 1 
credit. 

MUS 109/113. THEORY & AURAL I & II LAB 

Required for all first-year theory and aural skills students. Supplemental 
guided practice for academic concepts and practical skills covered in the 
Music Theory I & II and Aural Skills I & II curriculum. 0 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 215 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


MUS 110. INTRO TO MUSIC EDUCATION 

This fundamental course is important to introduce the music education 
majors to the history and development of music education, specifically in 
the public school system. Various methods and experiences in both the 
elementary and secondary schools will be discussed. 3 credits. 

MUS 111/112. AURAL SKILLS I & II 

An introduction to sight-singing, rhythm and ear training. The students will 
apply solfege to major and minor modes using a diatonic melody, perform 
rhythms in simple and compound meter, and identify intervals isolated and 
within a melodic dictation. 1 credit. 

MUS 140-440. LARGE ENSEMBLE 

Open to all Mercyhurst students by audition. Required (four years) for all 
music majors. Participation in choral (Concert Choir) or instrumental (Wind 
Ensemble, Jazz Ensemble, Chamber Orchestra) ensembles. Students learn 
and perform selected literature for programs on campus and in the 
community. 0-2 credits. 

MUS 145-445. SMALL ENSEMBLE 

Open to all Mercyhurst students by audition. Participation in small vocal 
and/or instrumental ensembles, or for composers, the study of 
contemporary repertoire. Small ensembles include chamber choir, opera 
workshop, composers workshop, and ensembles for woodwinds, brass, 
string chamber, percussion, piano, and guitar. 0-1 credits. 

MUS 150-250. CLASS PIANO I & II 

A two-year course of class instruction to develop functional piano skills that 
incorporates elements of applied theory. 2 credits. 

MUS 150-450. SECONDARY PIANO 

Music majors only. (Non-majors see MUS 176.) Individual instruction of 30 
minutes per week for non-piano majors with emphasis on the thorough 
development of musicianship, technique, style, interpretation and 
repertoire. 1 credit. 

MUS 151-451. PIANO (APPLIED) 

A four-year course of individual instruction with emphasis on the thorough 
development of musicianship, technique, style, interpretation and 
repertoire. Credits determined by student’s degree program. 1-2 credits. 

MUS 155-255. ACCOMPANYING 

Structured learning of the assigned accompanying repertoire including vocal 
and instrumental literature. Participation in lessons and guided performing 
experiences. 1 credit. 

MUS 156. CLASS GUITAR FOR MUSIC THERAPY 

This year-long course is designed for beginners or for players who need to 
fill in the gaps in their basic overall knowledge of the instrument, all within 
a music therapy context. Topics covered are fingerboard knowledge, chords, 
strumming, basic improvisation, basic finger-style technique, reading 
standard notation/tablature, and basic concepts in music theory. 1 credit. 

MUS 159. CLASS VOICE FOR MUSIC THERAPY 

A year-long course covering basic physical and psychological principles of 
voice production, with particular attention to problems of tone, diction, 
development of vocal range and sight-reading. Particular focus on popular 
and jazz music, accompanying self on guitar and piano, as well as clinical 
uses of vocal techniques with a variety of patient populations. 1 credit. 

MUS 160-460. VOICE (APPLIED) 

A four-year course of individual instruction with emphasis on the thorough 
development of musicianship, technique, style, interpretation and 
repertoire. Credits determined by student’s degree program. 1-2 credits. 

MUS 162-462. SECONDARY LESSONS -VOICE 

Only for non-majors, or minors who go beyond two years of lessons, or 
majors who elect to take secondary lessons not part of their degree 
program. Individual instruction of 30 minutes per week in voice, with 
emphasis on the thorough development of musicianship, technique, style, 
interpretation and repertoire. Students must pay the Applied Lesson Fee 
each semester. 1 credit. 

MUS 170-174. INSTRUMENTAL (APPLIED) 

First year of a four-year course of individual instruction with emphasis on 
the thorough development of musicianship, technique, style, interpretation 
and repertoire. Credits determined by student’s degree program. 1-2 
credits. 

MUS 176-476. SECONDARY LESSONS -INSTRUMENTAL 

Only for non-majors, minors who go beyond two years of lessons, or majors 
who elect to take secondary lessons not part of their degree program. 
Individual instruction of 30 minutes per week in an instrument, with 
emphasis on the thorough development of musicianship, technique, style, 
interpretation and repertoire. Students must pay the Applied Lesson Fee 
each semester. 1 credit. 

MUS 180-480. COMPOSITION (APPLIED) 

Course offers individual instruction with emphasis on the thorough 
development of compositional creativity and techniques. 1-2 credits. 

MUS 190-490. ATTENDANCE REQUIREMENT 

This is a Fall requirement of all music majors. Attendance at weekly Student 
Forums and certain faculty/guest recitals is required. Students will register 
for Attendance Requirement each semester for all four years. 0 credits. 

MUS 191-491. ATTENDANCE REQUIREMENT 

This is a Spring requirement of all music majors. Attendance at weekly 
Student Forums and certain faculty/guest recitals is required. Students will 
register for Attendance Requirement each semester for all four years. 0 
credits. 

MUS 195-495. INDEPENDENT STUDY 

Independent studies in music allow students to pursue knowledge in an 
area of special interest not covered in the curriculum. The chair of the 
Department of Music and the vice president for academic affairs must grant 
permission for independent studies. 1-3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 216 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


MUS 201/202. THEORY III & IV 

A continuation of MUS 101/102 and a more in-depth study of scales, chords 
and structural analysis; this includes topics like modes, mode mixture, 
secondary dominants, augmented and Neapolitan sixth chords, enharmonic 
equivalence, and an introduction to 20th century techniques. 3 credits. 

MUS 206. ORCHESTRAL/CHAMBER MUSIC LITERATURE 

Provides a broad historical overview and stylistic analysis of dominant 
instrumental works, genres, and composers of the Western classical art 
music, primarily from the 17th century into the mid-20th century; this 
includes chamber music, symphonic literature, concertos, symphonic 
poems, and overtures. It will have students defining and using terminology 
as it pertains to orchestral and chamber music, demonstrating a deeper 
knowledge of the repertoire, and analyzing various chamber and symphonic 
works. 3 credits. 

MUS 207. WORLD MUSIC AND CULTURES/JAZZ HISTORY 

This course is designed to broaden the student’s knowledge and 
appreciation of non-Western music and jazz, with emphasis on 
representative works from the world’s major cultures and the African origins 
of jazz. It provides a brief introduction to the musical elements of style and 
performance from a variety of non-Western cultures and jazz. 3 credits. 

MUS 211/212. AURAL SKILLS III & IV 

Uses the skills achieved in MUS 111/112 to sing and dictate melodies that 
are diatonic, modal, chromatic, and modulate in various clefs and keys. In 
addition, students will perform rhythms that are more advanced in simple 
and compound meters and will be introduced to music that is more 
metrically complex. 1 credit. 

MUS 230/246. EDUCATIONAL METHODS & TECHNIQUES 

This sophomore-year course encompasses the first year of a two-year cycle. 
It focuses on the following: a) instructional planning, b) strategies for 
teaching musical concepts in all ensemble settings, c) administering large 
and small ensembles, and d) the performance techniques of the voice, 
string, wind and percussive instruments. The student will build practical 
knowledge and skills through experiences in instructional design, 
composition and arranging, ensemble instruction and conduction, as well as 
ensemble participation on all secondary instruments. 1-3 credits. 

MUS 270-274. INSTRUMENTAL (APPLIED) 

Second year of a four-year course of individual instruction with emphasis on 
the thorough development of musicianship, technique, style, interpretation 
and repertoire. Credits determined by student’s degree program. 1-2 
credits. 

MUS 281/282. DICTION FOR SINGERS 

Study of components of spoken language, including IPA, characteristics of 
accent, intonation, etc. Practice in oral presentations and transcriptions. 
Languages include English, Italian, German, and French. 2 credits. 

MUS 304. FORM AND ANALYSIS 

Development of the traditional techniques of musical form and structure. 3 
credits. 

MUS 307. INSTRUMENTAL LIT&MATERIALS 

A study of instrumental materials in various media depending on applied 
major instrument. 3 credits. 

MUS 310. PIANO PEDAGOGY 

Designed to provide the student with materials and approaches to piano 
teaching from primary to advanced levels. Teaching method used will be 
lectures, demonstrations and research. 3 credits. 

MUS 321. ELEMENTARY GENERAL METHODS 

Methods and materials for developing appropriate music education 
curriculum and teaching general music in the elementary school (K-6). 2 
credits. 

MUS 322. SECONDARY GENERAL METHODS 

This course will cover various topics and methods to better equip the 
student with the necessary tools and basic skills needed to teach general 
music at the secondary level successfully. The course will focus on class 
guitar techniques and other student participation activities and will include 
classroom observation in cooperating public schools. 2 credits. 

MUS 330/346. EDUCATIONAL METHODS & TECHNIQUES 

This junior-year course encompasses the second year of a two-year cycle. It 
focuses on the following: a) instructional planning, b) strategies for teaching 
musical concepts in all ensemble settings, c) administering large and small 
ensembles, and d) the performance techniques of the voice, string, wind 
and percussive instruments. The student will build practical knowledge and 
skills through experiences in instructional design, composition and 
arranging, ensemble instruction and conducting, as well as ensemble 
participation on all secondary instruments. 1-3 credits. 

MUS 334. MARCHING BAND TECHNIQUES 

A broad overview of all aspects of directing a high school marching band 
program. This course will include organization of all performing sections and 
support groups, drill techniques, modern show design and judging 
techniques. 1 credit. 

MUS 341. INSTRUMENTAL PEDAGOGY 

Survey of methods and materials needed for teaching instruments in the 
student’s major applied area. 3 credits. 

MUS 344. IMPROVISATION 

This course is designed to include a wide range of experiences in 
improvisation (jazz and non-jazz, free and structured) for all musicians. A 
road map for success through future practice will be provided as well as 
ideas for the implementation of improvisation activities in a variety of 
classroom settings. All musicians are welcome. 1 credit. 

MUS 370-374. INSTRUMENTAL (APPLIED) 

Third year of a four-year course of individual instruction with emphasis on 
the thorough development of musicianship, technique, style, interpretation 
and repertoire. Credits determined by student’s degree program. 1-2 
credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 217 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


MUS 384. ORCHESTRATION 

A study of the basic principles of instrumentation; structural differences and 
individual characteristics of orchestral instruments and how this effects the 
sound produced; basic arrangements of pitch, notation of pitch for various 
instruments of the orchestra, and how to use combinations of these 
instruments to produce desired sounds. 3 credits. 

MUS 401/402. VOCAL LITERATURE & MATERIALS 

A study of musical materials for voice in various media. Material to be drawn 
from all periods and styles of vocal repertoire. 3 credits. 

MUS 470-474. INSTRUMENTAL (APPLIED) 

Fourth year of a four-year course of individual instruction with emphasis on 
the thorough development of musicianship, technique, style, interpretation 
and repertoire. Credits determined by student’s degree program. 1-2 
credits. 

MUS 410. VOCAL PEDAGOGY 

Survey of methods and materials needed for teaching voice to students at all 
levels. 3 credits. 

MUS 413. BEGINNING CONDUCTING 

Fundamentals of baton techniques, score reading and interpretation. 
Students organize, rehearse and conduct small vocal or instrumental 
ensembles. 1 credit. 

MUS 414. ADVANCED INSTRUMENTAL CONDUCTING & REPERTOIRE 

Students are expected to acquire a mastery of more advanced techniques of 
conducting appropriate to their area of expertise: accuracy and clarity in 
conducting complex rhythms and the ability to read scores for any 
combination of instruments/voices. Includes instruction in selection of 
appropriate repertoire. Prerequisite: MUS 413. 1 credit. 

MUS 415. ADVANCED CHORAL CONDUCTING & REPERTOIRE 

The student is expected to acquire a mastery of more advanced techniques 
of conducting: accuracy and clarity in conducting complex rhythms and the 
ability to read scores for any combination of instruments/voices. Includes 
instruction in selection of appropriate repertoire. Prerequisite: MUS 413. 1 
credit. 

MUS 430. PIANO LIT & MATERIALS 

Study and analysis of music from the pre-piano period to the present. 
Special emphasis given to development of keyboard forms, techniques and 
styles. 3 credits. 

MUS 499. SENIOR RECITAL 

Student’s required senior recital performed in the senior year. 1 credit. 

MUTH 101. MUSIC THERAPY FOUNDATIONS 

An overview of the field of music therapy from its historical roots to its 
present day theories, methods of treatment, ethics and standards of practice 
for the professional music therapist. 3 credits. 

MUTH 102. CLINICAL MUSICIANSHIP & SONGWRITING IN MUSIC 
THERAPY 

Emphasis on functional skills on a variety of instruments commonly used in 
a music therapy setting. Other aspects include original songwriting, 
improvisation, alternate tunings, Greek modes, music technology and 
building population-specific repertoire. 2 credits. 

MUTH 103. PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC 

An introduction to phenomena involving music and behavior, including 
physical, acoustical, perceptual, psychological and pedagogical aspects. 2 
credits. 

MUTH 104. CLINICAL EXPERIENCE I 

Pre-internship experience in music therapy. Each student will complete a 
total of 12 sessions at the chosen site, in addition to a weekly 
seminar/supervision meeting with faculty. 2 credits. 

MUTH 201. SPEC POPULATIONS MUS THRPY 

Provides an overview of the wide spectrum of clinical populations served by 
music therapists and the kinds of therapeutic issues encountered in practice 
with individuals and groups. Emphasis is placed on gaining insight into 
clinical issues, gathering data and evaluation, assessment, goal-setting and 
music techniques. 3 credits. 

MUTH 204. CLINICAL EXPERIENCE II 

Pre-Internship experience in music therapy. Each student will complete a 
total of 12 sessions at the chosen site, in addition to a weekly 
seminar/supervision meeting with faculty. 2 credits. 

MUTH 304. CLINICAL EXPERIENCE III 

Pre-Internship experience in music therapy. Each student will complete a 
total of 12 sessions at the chosen site, in addition to a weekly 
seminar/supervision meeting with faculty. 2 credits. 

MUTH 305. CLINICAL EXPERIENCE IV 

Pre-Internship experience in music therapy. Each student will complete a 
total of 12 sessions at the chosen site, in addition to a weekly 
seminar/supervision meeting with faculty. 2 credits. 

MUTH 405. CLINICAL EXPERIENCE V 

Pre-Internship experience in music therapy. Each student will complete a 
total of 12 sessions at the chosen site, in addition to a weekly 
seminar/supervision meeting with faculty. 2 credits. 

MUTH 406. CLINICAL EXPERIENCE VI 

Pre-Internship experience in music therapy. Each student will complete a 
total of 12 sessions at the chosen site, in addition to a weekly 
seminar/supervision meeting with faculty. 2 credits. 

MUTH 473. MUSIC THERAPY INTERNSHIP 

A full-time internship placement with an AMTA approved internship site 
supervised by an on-site board certified music therapist. 0 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 218 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


PHIL 100. PHILOSOPHICAL INQUIRY 

An introduction to philosophy through a study of the principles of sound 
argument, the nature of philosophical perplexity, and selected topics in the 
theory of knowledge, ethics, metaphysics, and the philosophy of religion. 
Lecture and discussion. 3 credits. 

PHIL 101. INTRODUCTION TO LOGIC 

An introduction to the rules and processes of rational thinking, 
argumentation, analysis and criticism. Students will learn the elements of 
logic, become skilled at constructing rationally compelling deductive and 
inductive arguments, and learn how to effectively analyze and criticize 
arguments through a study of formal and informal fallacies. 
Lecture/discussion. 3 credits. 

PHIL 102. PHILOSOPHY OF HUMAN NATURE 

An examination of issues involving the nature of persons and human 
existence. Topics include freedom of action, the relationship of human 
nature to social reality, the extent to which humans are selfish, the nature of 
genuine self-interest, the basic problem of human existence, the meaning of 
life and the good life. Lecture and discussion. 3 credits. 

PHIL 105. PRACTICAL REASONING 

A practical study of thinking skills with emphasis on critical thinking, critical 
reading and the correct use of logical techniques in ordinary life. Satisfies 
the logic elective requirement for Philosophy majors and minors. Lecture/ 
discussion. 3 credits. 

PHIL 150. PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES 

Invites students to explore a philosophical problem, theme, movement, 
school of thought, genre or interdisciplinary topic in depth, using a variety of 
sources, including both philosophical and non-philosophical literature as 
well as other forms of media, such as film, music, theater and art, as a 
means of philosophical interpretation, comprehension, analysis and 
criticism. Recent course titles: “Revolution,” “Consciousness,” and 
“Institutional Sociopathy.” 3 credits. 

PHIL 200. PHILOSOPHY & LITERATURE 

Provides students the opportunity to explore important works of literature 
with rich philosophical content as well as works of philosophy that are 
written in various literary styles, examining literature from a philosophical 
perspective and philosophy as a form of literature. Lecture and discussion. 
3 credits. 

PHIL 210. EXISTENTIALISM 

A study of existentialist thinkers, literature and film. The characteristics of 
existential philosophy are examined and the ideas of such figures as 
Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Heidegger and Sartre are explored. Existential 
themes are then used to interpret works by writers such as Dostoyevsky, 
Kafka, Camus and Hesse and to discuss some selected recent films. 3 credits. 

PHIL 230. AESTHETICS & CRITICISM 

An investigation into the nature of art and the aesthetic experience. The 
ground and function of aesthetic judgments is explored, issues surrounding 
the evolution of art are examined, and the role of aesthetic experience in the 
larger phenomenon of human experience is discussed. Lecture and 
discussion. 3 credits. 

PHIL 260. HIST PHIL TO RENAISS 

A study of the history of Western philosophical thought and culture from its 
advent in ancient Greece to the Renaissance, emphasizing the great minds 
and ideas of Western civilization and how these have helped to shape our 
cultural landscape, focusing on the most significant ideological continuities 
and ruptures that constitute the historical changes of the Western world. 
Special emphasis is placed on shifts in conceptual frameworks and narrative 
forms found in the works of Greek dramatists, the early natural 
philosophers, Socratic philosophy, and the philosophical systems of Plato, 
Aristotle, the hedonists, the stoics, and Christian theologians, such as St. 
Augustine and St. Thomas Aquinas. 3 credits. 

PHIL 261. HIST OF PHIL SINCE RENAISS 

A study of Western philosophical thought and culture from the Renaissance 
to the 21st century, emphasizing the great minds and ideas of Western 
civilization and how these have helped to shape our cultural landscape, 
focusing on the most significant ideological continuities and ruptures that 
constitute the history of the modern Western world. Emphasis is placed on 
the Renaissance and Reformation, modern rationalism and empiricism, and 
the subsequent movements that grew out of these, such as German 
idealism, romanticism, scientific materialism, positivism, Marxism, and 
modern psychology and existentialism. Lecture and discussion. 3 credits. 

PHIL 270. FOUNDATIONS CATHOLIC PHIL 

An exploration of the rich, complex, and diverse foundations of the Catholic 
worldview. Students will develop an understanding of the key movements 
(Platonism, Aristoteleianism, Neo-Platonism, Gnosticism, Manichaeism, 
Scholasticism, etc.), individuals, and texts that have motivated the growth 
and development of Catholicism in the ancient, medieval and modern 
world. Special emphasis will be placed on the conceptual frameworks and 
narratives of Greek philosophers (Plato, Aristotle, and Plotinus), early 
Christian scriptures (the New Testament), and Christian theologians 
(Boethius, St. Augustine and St. Thomas Aquinas). 3 credits. 

PHIL 309. POSTMODERNISM 

A study of the philosophical sources and significance of postmodern themes, 
thinkers and movements. The course will introduce students to (1) the 
distinction between two historical periods and intellectual epochs: 
modernity and postmodernity, (2) the role that postmodern thinking plays 
in contemporary metaphysics, epistemology, natural science, social science, 
religion and pop culture, and (3) various modern and postmodern 
philosophers and cultural theorists including Nietzsche, Heidegger, Derrida, 
Foucault, Lyotard, Rorty and Baudrillard. Lecture and discussion. 
Prerequisites: PHIL 100. 3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 219 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


PHIL 321. TOPICS IN PHIL OF SCIENCE 

A study of the science of biology as it raises interesting philosophical 
problems. Topics include historical, sociological and psychological issues in 
biology. The status of confirmation, falsification, laws, theories, hypotheses, 
observation and explanation in biology. We will discuss dogma, revolutions, 
paradigms and normal science and examine the ways in which realism and 
anti-realism manifest themselves in biology. Finally, we will discuss moral 
and legal issues raised by advances in biology including the prolongation of 
life, the availability and use of genetic information, alternative reproductive 
technology, therapeutic and reproductive cloning. Prerequisites: PHIL 100. 
3 credits. 

PHIL 345. PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION 

This course investigates various issues and arguments within philosophy of 
religion, including: the problem of evil, arguments for God’s existence, the 
concept of religious experience, divine omniscience and omnipotence, 
religious language, miracles, life after death and the justification of religious 
belief. 3 credits. 

PHIL 360. PHILOSOPHY OF LAW 

A study of the various philosophical issues and problems that arise in law 
and legal institutions. Special emphasis is placed on examining the ways in 
which law is shaped by distinctly philosophical principles like justice, liberty, 
equality, rights and responsibility. Topics include the relationship between 
law and morality, the unique nature of legal obligation and its connections 
with legitimacy, authority, and citizenship, and problems surrounding the 
interpretation and enforcement of law. Lecture/discussion. 3 credits. 

PHIL 400. POLITICAL THEORY 

A study of major figures in the history of political theory and their particular 
political theories. The primary purpose of the course is to analyze the 
relationship between political theory and political action. The course covers 
the three general historical periods: ancient, Christian, and modern. Some of 
the political thinkers and theories covered include: Plato, Aristotle, St. 
Augustine, Thomas Aquinas, Machiavelli, Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, Marx, 
Burke, and contemporary figures like Boegelin and Rawls. 3 credits. 

PHIL 401. APPLIED ETHICS 

An advanced examination and evaluation of selected contemporary and 
broadly relevant social issues through the framework of philosophical ethics, 
providing seniors the opportunity to unify and apply their acquired 
knowledge and skills in a way that both transcends and informs their 
professional goals while emphasizing personal and civic responsibility. 
Lecture and discussion. 3 credits. 

PHIL 405. ETHICS & THE PROFESSIONS 

An examination of the unique ethical dilemmas encountered in professional 
practice in a wide range of professions, including business, law, education, 
journalism, science, medicine and health care, and politics and government. 
Critical scrutiny is given to the specialized norms and values that govern 
professionals in their institutional practices, as well as to those points at 
which professional ethics conforms to and conflicts with the more general 
norms of social morality. Additional issues for examination include 
professional autonomy and self-regulation, the social status and 

responsibilities of professional expertise, and the unique opportunities for 
social service provided by professions. Lecture and discussion. 3 credits. 

PHIL 420. MYSTICISM 

A study of the significance of mystical experience in the world’s religions. 
What is the meaning of particularly vivid, intense religious experiences 
reported by sages, saints, and seers in the faith traditions of the world? This 
course will examine classic analyses of mysticism, the nature, context, and 
conditions of mystical experience, the “perennial philosophy,” the scope of 
ineffability, and the cognitive merit of mystical experience. 3 credits. 

PHYS 100. CONCEPTUAL PHYSICS 

As a study focusing on the ideas of physics, this course is aimed at students 
with non-science majors. Very few math skills are necessary as the 
emphases are the historical development of physics, the main concepts and 
ideas of physics, and the current state of the discipline. A central theme in 
the course will be using physics to explain everyday phenomena. No lab 
with this course. 3 credits. 

PHYS 101. PRINCIPLES OF PHYSICS I 

This course is an algebra-based physics course designed both for students 
with science majors and as a laboratory science course in the core 
curriculum. A working knowledge of algebra and the basics of trigonometry 
are required. The major topics that will be covered include: Newtonian 
mechanics, circular motion, energy, momentum, rotational motion and 
Fluid mechanics. Though concepts of physics will be discussed in detail, the 
focus of the course will be problem-solving techniques. Prerequisites: MATH 
112, OR, MATH 118. Corequisite: PHYS 103. 3 credits. 

PHYS 102. PRINCIPLES OF PHYSICS II 

This course is a continuation of Principles of Physics I; thus similar 
mathematical skill level requirements apply. Additionally, this course in the 
series continues to emphasize the application of physics to other fields. 
Topics include vibrations, wave motion, light and optics, and electricity & 
magnetism. Prerequisite: PHYS 101. Corequisite: PHYS 106. 3 credits. 

PHYS 103. PRIN OF PHYSICS I LAB 

Laboratory experience to accompany Principles of Physics I. Corequisite: 
PHYS 101. 1 credit. 

PHYS 106. PRIN OF PHYSICS II LAB 

Laboratory experience to accompany Principles of Physics II. Corequisite: 
PHYS 102. 1 credit. 

PHYS 200. FRESHMAN SEMINAR 

The freshman seminar course is designed to expose new students to the 
ideas and frontiers of physics. Aside from getting a general feel for the 
various sub-disciplines in physics, students will learn what it means to be a 
good scientist: to be curious, to ask good questions and seek meaningful 
answers, to recognize that it is often OK to admit you don’t know the 
answers, and to collaborate and participate in the process of science. 1 
credit. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 220 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


PHYS 201. GENERAL PHYSICS I 

This is a calculus-based course that is designed for natural science and 
mathematics majors, (biology, biochemistry, chemistry, earth-space science 
education, mathematics). The role of physics in other scientific fields will be 
emphasized as classical mechanics is covered. This portion of the General 
Physics series will deal strictly with mechanics; topics include: motion in 
one-, two-and three-dimensions, the laws of motion, work, potential 
energy, kinetic energy, conservation of energy, linear and rotational motion, 
and the prediction of motion based on initial conditions. Prerequisite: MATH 

170. Corequisite: PHYS 203. 3 credits. 
PHYS 202. GENERAL PHYSICS II 

This course is a continuation of General Physics I; calculus skills are required. 
Topics include: waves, electricity and magnetism, light and optics, and 
thermodynamics. Problem solving and the relationships between physics 
and the fields of biology, biochemistry, and chemistry continue to be 
emphasized. Prerequisites: PHYS 201, (MATH 171, beginning in Spring 
2015). Corequisite: PHYS 206. 3 credits. 

PHYS 203. GENERAL PHYSICS I LAB 

Laboratory experience to accompany General Physics I. Corequisite: PHYS 

201. 1 credit. 
PHYS 206. GENERAL PHYSICS II LAB 

Laboratory experience to accompany General Physics II. Corequisite: PHYS 

202. 1 credit. 
PHYS 310. MODERN PHYSICS 

This course is a continuation of PHYS 201/202 and is designed to present 
natural science and mathematics students with exposure to contemporary 
physics topics and their applications. Topics include: relativity, nuclear 
physics, particle physics and basic quantum physics. Prerequisite: PHYS 202. 
3 credits. 

PHYS 312. MODERN PHYSICS LAB 

Laboratory experience to accompany Modern Physics. Prerequisite: PHYS 

202. Corequisite: PHYS 310. 1 credit. 
PHYS 325. NUCLEAR PHYSICS 

This course is an introduction to the elements of nuclear physics. Course 
topics include basic properties of the nucleus and nuclear radiation, bound 
state energy wave functions, transition probabilities, binding energy and 
stability, and interactions of emitted particles with matter. Prerequisite: 
PHYS 360. 3 credits. 

PHYS 330. THERMAL PHYSICS 

A more in-depth study of thermal physics than the introductory courses, this 
course involves present treatment of thermal dynamics including 
applications of the theory of ideal gases and other state functions, and in-
depth treatment of the laws of thermodynamics and their relevance to real-
world systems, non-ideal and non-equilibrium systems, and the basics of 
kinetic theory. Prerequisite: PHYS 202. 3 credits. 

PHYS 335. OPTICS 

With an emphasis on the visual and tangible nature of light and using the 
microscope as the focus of our efforts, this course presents an introduction to 
optics. Course topics include both geometric optics (ray tracing, lens design, 
aberrations, apertures and stops, etc.) and physical optics (polarization, 
interference, diffraction, wave guides, resolution etc.). The course is 
presented in a studio format to maximize the connection between the 
theory learned in class and the construction of optical systems. Prerequisite: 
PHYS 202. 3 credits. 

PHYS 350. MECHANICS I 

This course presents an intermediate treatment of classical mechanics. 
Topics covered include: motion of a particle in three dimensions, Kepler's 
laws of planetary motion, phase space and oscillations, Lagrangian and 
Hamiltonian forumations, and central force motion. Prerequisite: PHYS202, 
MATH233. 3 credits. 

PHYS 360. ELECTROMAGNETISM 

This course presents an intermediate treatment of the electric and magnetic 
phenomena using vector calculus. Topics include advanced electrostatics, 
magnetostatics, induction, development of Maxwell’s equations, the 
Poynting theorem and electromagnetic waves, and radiation theory. 
Prerequisite: PHYS 202, MATH 233. 3 credits. 

PHYS 420. QUANTUM MECHANICS 

An introduction to quantum theory and calculations, this course emphasizes 
the fundamental of the quantum approach. Topics include the postulates of 
quantum mechanics, quantum operators and the wave function, the bra-ket 
notation, Hermitian operators, eigenfunctions and eigenvalues, 
conservation theorems, angular momentum, fermions and bosons, time 
development of wavefuctions, and perturbation theory as time allows. 
Prerequisite: MATH 150, 240. Suggested prerequisite: PHYS 360. 3 credits. 

PHYS 440. TOPICS IN PHYSICS EDUC 

This course provides an overview of techniques which can assist the 
development of conceptual understanding in physics. Information will be 
taken from the physics education research literature with an emphasis on 
models of teaching and learning. The models will then be discussed in 
terms of application to contemporary classrooms at the secondary and postsecondary 
levels. Prerequisite: PHYS 202. 3 credits. 

PHYS 450. SENIOR RESEARCH PROJECT 

Students are expected to engage in independent research, either theoretical 
or experimental, in collaboration with a faculty member. Prerequisite: PHYS 

202. 3 credits. 
POLI 100. AMERICAN GOVERNMENT 

Introductory course in political science stressing how policy-making is done 
at the national level. Beginning with the Constitution, an introduction is 
given to the three main branches of the U.S. government. Attention is also 
given to elections, economics, political parties, interest groups and the 
federal system. 3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 221 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


POLI 103. WINNING THE WHITE HOUSE 

The course introduces students to the exciting world of electoral politics by 
exploring strategies, tactics, institutions involved in presidential elections, 
and by following the presidential election in real time. In addition to 
engaging readings, lectures and multimedia experiences, students will 
participate in an election simulation. 

POLI 105. GLOBAL ISSUES 

An overview of significant global issues, such as human rights, arms 
proliferation, regional conflicts, and sustainable development, with 
attention to the scope, causes, and consequences of these issues. Special 
emphasis will be placed on theories of global civil society and the role of 
NGOs and transnational advocacy groups in mobilizing responses to these 
issues. The contributions of the constructivist perspective in international 
relations, with theoretical insights drawn from both political science and 
sociology, will be explored and debated in readings and assignments. 3 
credits. 

POLI 201: CATHOLIC POLITICAL AND SOCIAL THOUGHT 

A study and analysis of significant political, social, and economic ideas that 
can be classified as Roman Catholic. The course covers a range of historical 
thinkers and aims to place each thinker’s ideas in their engendering context. 
The course begins with an examination of what constitutes Catholic political 
and social thought and then examines prominent Catholic and Christian 
thinkers and ideas such as social justice, St. Augustine, Thomas Aquinas, 
Orestes Brownson, Henri de Lubac, John Courtney Murray, G. K. Chesterton, 
Flannery O’Connor, Walker Percy and C.S. Lewis. 

POLI 202. CONTEMPORARY ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES 

This class will address a varying collection of contemporary environmental 
issues, with the focus determined by the professor who is offering the 
course. Issues addressed may include environmental racism, sustainable 
development, smart growth, ecoterrorism and radical environmentalism, 
and other current issues of importance. The investigation focuses on the 
substance of the issue as well as policy alternatives. 3 credits. 

POLI/RIAP 213. INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY 

An introduction to national security decision-making in the U.S. with a 
special emphasis on the role of intelligence in formulating policy. Historical 
overview of national security politics and strategy since WWII. Description of 
major institutions and processes involved in national security policymaking. 
Survey of significant national security problems and their changing 
nature in the 21st century. 3 credits. 

POLI 218. LIBERALISM AND CONSERVATISM 

The course is an examination of the two major political ideologies in 
contemporary American politics. It is designed to illustrate the connections 
between the two ideologies and the outcomes of American politics, e.g. 
public policy, law, political culture, and public discourse. The course also 
traces the intellectual roots of conservatism and liberalism. Seminal thinkers 
of each ideology are discussed and their contribution to the various strains 
of liberalism and conservatism are explained. 3 credits. 

POLI 220. CAMPAIGNS, STRATEGY, AND U.S. ELECTIONS 

This course emphasizes a blend of political science perspectives and practical 
considerations in modern campaigns. The subject material focuses on the 
nature of mobilization, competition, negative advertising, strategic polling, 
and changing tactics of Internet campaigning, as well as encouraging critical 
thinking through campaign simulations. 3 credits. 

POLI/HIST 224. THE VIETNAM WAR 

This look at the Vietnam War begins by examining the history of Vietnam 
but focuses on the American experience. Three central questions are 
addressed: How and why did the U.S. get involved? What was the nature of 
that involvement and what went wrong? And what were/are the 
lessons/results of the war? 3 credits. 

POLI 225. AMERICAN LEGAL PROCESS 

This is an introduction to the liberal arts study of law. It examines 
fundamental questions about the nature and functions of law in society. 
Topics include legal reasoning, discretion, wealth and power, role of the 
police, profession of law, juries and community participation, conflict 
resolution, and the conflicting images of law relative to freedom and 
obedience. 3 credits. 

POLI/HIST 229. ENVIRONMENTAL HISTORY OF U.S. 

This course surveys the evolution of American attitudes and values 
regarding nature, landscape and the environment. In addition, a close look 
is taken at the history of environmental change in particular regions and at 
the politics of the environment in the 20th century, particularly in the post-
World War II era. 3 credits. 

POLI 236. WORLD POLITICS 

An examination of influences on world politics using theory and practice of 
international relations. Historical and contemporary case studies are used to 
enhance theoretical and conceptual analysis of state and non-state actors’ 
behavior in world politics. 3 credits. 

POLI 240. COMPARATIVE POLITICS: AFRICA 

Africa is a resource-rich region, comprising 53 states. Endemic poverty, 
pervasive corruption, patronage and ethnic cleavages are often used to 
describe the entire region. Yet, it is inaccurate to paint the region with such 
a broad brush. Within Africa, there is diversity as some states perform better 
than others on many politico-economic indicators. Thematically, this course 
examines the complexities of politics in Africa. Specifically, we will explore 
the interaction of political culture, institutions, and domestic and 
international actors and the political outcomes they produce in African 
countries. 3 credits. 

POLI 241. COMPARATIVE POLITICS: ASIA 

A comparative study of a variety of political systems emphasizing Asia. 
Survey of topics/problems related to economic development, 
democratization, government structure, and foreign relations with the 
United States. Specific countries examined include China, Japan, India, 
Indonesia and South Korea. 3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 222 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


POLI 242. COMPARATIVE POLITICS: EUROPE 

A comparative study of a variety of political systems emphasizing Europe. 
Survey of topics includes government structure, political parties and 
coalitions, social movements, European integration, economic transition, 
and foreign relations with the United States. Special emphasis on Britain, 
France, Germany, Poland and the European Union. 3 credits. 

POLI 243. COMPARATIVE POLITICS: LATIN AMERICA 

This course explores thematically the political and economic experiences 
and challenges faced by countries in the region of Latin America. Located in 
the backyard of the United States, Latin America is a region with a rich 
history and political legacy: from colonial domination to independence, 
from authoritarian regimes to democratic governance, from economic crises 
to membership to the world’s exclusive G-20 club. At the end of the course, 
you should have an understanding of the factors that shape politics in the 
region and the future directions of Latin American politics. 3 credits. 

POLI 244. COMPARATIVE POLITICS: COUNTRIES AT CROSSROADS 

The later part of the 20th century saw an unprecedented surge in democratic 
movements all over the globe. From East Central Europe and Central Asia to 
Latin America and Africa the global “wave” of democratization seemed to be 
reaching into all corners of the world. Some observers declared an 
ideological victory for economic and political liberalism, and Francis 
Fukuyama has famously proclaimed the “end of history.” Yet, the path of 
these new democracies has been nothing but uniform and in many cases the 
initial euphoric democratic transition failed to produce effective 
consolidated democracies. This course examines the political strife of the 
countries at crossroads and attempts to explain the successes and failures of 
democratization efforts in the strategically important regions around the 
world. 3 credits. 

POLI 246. POLITICAL CINEMA 

The course is designed to allow the students to experience the 
multidimensional nature of political films, including their influence on 
individual, social, national and global levels. The goal of the course is to 
engage students in a deeper critical evaluation of select films in order to 
gain a broader understanding of the role cinematic art plays in enhancing 
our understanding of the world around us. The students will be given 
analytical and theoretical tools with which to critically evaluate the motion 
pictures and the intentions of their creators, directors, and writers. As a 
creative art form the film gives us an opportunity to whiteness and 
experience familiar and unknown life situations though different 
interpretive lens. The students will be given an opportunity to convey their 
own political messages in short films of their making. 3 credits. 

POLI 250. LEADERSHIP 

In this course the subject of leadership is studied from many different 
perspectives. The questions studied include: What is leadership? Is there a 
moral aspect to leadership? What are the types of leaders? Why do followers 
follow? 3 credits. 

POLI 280. GLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL POLITICS 

The emphasis is on the political and economic rather than technical or 
scientific nature of global environmental problems. Topics include 

diplomacy and negotiation, the role of international institutions (such as the 
United Nations) and nongovernmental organizations in promoting and 
funding various “sustainable development” strategies in the industrialized 
and developing world. 3 credits. 

POLI 282. ETHNIC CONFLICT 

A study of the sources, conduct, and settlement of ethnic conflicts. Theories 
of identity, nationalism, causes of conflict, changing international norms, 
and post-conflict reconstruction are examined in the context of real-world 
examples. 3 credits. 

POLI 289. SOCIAL KNOWLEDGE 

Is it possible to have a social “science” or are there other, better ways to 
engage in systematic, principled thinking about political and social 
phenomena in order to produce valid knowledge? What should be studied 
and how should it be studied? In this course we explore the ideas of some of 
the founders of contemporary social science such as Marx, Weber and 
Durkheim along with many other prominent recent thinkers who helped 
create and shape the study of social science as it has evolved from the 19th 
to the 21st century. 

POLI 290. RESEARCH METHODS IN SOCIAL SCIENCE 

An introduction to reading, writing, and conducting both quantitative and 
qualitative research in the social sciences. Special attention is given to the 
logic of research design, including: research questions, variables, 
hypotheses, and data analysis. This course is important particularly to those 
students going on to graduate school and to those who plan on working in 
politics. 3 credits. 

POLI 293. AMERICAN POLITICAL PARTIES AND INTEREST GROUPS 

An overview of the history and function of political parties and interest 
groups in the American political system. In addition to analyzing the 
influence of parties on voter behavior, elections and the organization of 
government, this course explores the power, tactics and formation of 
interest groups within the context of several theoretical frameworks. 3 
credits. 

POLI 300. STATE AND LOCAL POLITICS 

A general overview of and introduction to the structure and policy making 
process of state and local government. It also includes some analysis of 
federalism—how state and local government fit into the American 
constitutional framework. The course addresses budget issues, political 
participation, and direct democracy. 3 credits. 

POLI 301. AMERICAN POLITICAL THOUGHT 

A study of American political theory. The course focuses on the philosophical 
roots/origins of the American political tradition and surveys the evolution of 
political theory in American political history. Special attention is given to the 
period of the American founding and the ideas that informed the 
Constitution. 3 credits. 

POLI 302. POLITICS OF RUSSIA 

An energy exporter with one of the largest nuclear stockpiles in the world 
today, Russia continues to be a formidable power. Challenges facing Russia 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 223 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


affect not only order and stability inside Russia, but potentially also 
international security and the global economy. This course is designed to 
facilitate a greater understanding of Russian domestic and foreign policy. 
We will examine the political institutions/legacies, political process, political 
culture, leadership, public opinion, and contemporary challenges facing 
Russia. 3 credits. 

POLI 303. GEOPOLITICS 

Investigates politics among nation-states and the conduct of international 
relations, with particular attention paid to the role of power and the 
geographic location of each country. 3 credits. 

POLI 307. NATIONALISM 

Nationalism represents one of the most controversial, emotionally charged 
and wide-spread ideologies of our time. The phenomenon, which Albert 
Einstein once called the “measles of humanity” was considered to be in 
decline in the second half of the twentieth century as the forces of 
globalization challenged the concept of a “nation–state.” Yet, we are 
witnessing powerful manifestations of nationalism all over the globe. The 
complexity of this phenomenon is signified by the broad range of theories 
and approaches to the study of nationalist thought and practice. The goal of 
this course is to provide students with the overview of these theoretical 
approaches by exploring the intellectual roots of nationalism as ideology as 
well as exploration of contemporary nationalist manifestations around the 
world. 3 credits. 

POLI 311. MEDIA AND POLITICS 

This course outlines the influence of modern media on American politics. 
Topics covered include the organization of and decision making within the 
media, the effect the media has on attitudes and behavior, the relationship 
of the government to the media (censorship, freedom of the press, 
government regulation), and the role media plays in elections. 3 credits. 

POLI 315. PUBLIC OPINION, POLLING AND VOTING IN AMERICAN 
ELECTIONS 

This course is an in-depth look at the contours of the modern American 
electorate. Students will become familiar with both applied and theoretical 
aspects of public opinion and polling. The course explores analysis of 
American elections, political socialization, political participation, and public 
opinion with a focus on individual and group determinants of voting. 3 
credits. 

POLI 317. POLITICAL PSYCHOLOGY 

This course surveys the social psychological theories of how voters form 
political attitudes and to what extent such attitudes translate into 
behaviors. Of primary focus is the ability for perspectives in political 
psychology to understand how citizens think about politics and why it 
matters for American democracy. 3 credits. 

POLI 320. ENVIRONMENTAL PHILOSOPHY 

Examination of the philosophical aspects of environmental politics, 
including the underlying philosophical reasons for environmental policy and 
conservation. Specific topics include property rights, environmental 
protection, stewardship, and capitalism. The ideas of pertinent thinkers like 

Locke, Hobbes, Burke, Thoreau, Rousseau, Hardin, Pinchot, William Ophuls, 
Malthus, Ehrlich, Rachel Carson, Aldo Leopold and John Muir are covered. 3 
credits. 

POLI 321. ENVIRONMENTAL LAW 

Taught utilizing a law school style approach—including a moot court 
experience—the purpose of this course is to provide an in-depth look at 
current U.S. environmental law, as well as the underlying technology 
implicit in a successful environmental law framework. This course will 
provide an excellent opportunity to improve your oral communication skills. 
3 credits. 

POLI/CRJS 322. LEGAL RESEARCH AND WRITING 

This course will introduce students to the legal research process through 
both classroom and library experience. Students will become familiar with 
the major sources of legal research and will complete a research assignment 
which will require the use of all types of sources. This course will also 
emphasize the principles and techniques of legal writing, including proper 
analysis and appropriate citation. Recommended for Pre-Law students. 3 
credits. 

POLI 325. INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 

Public administration is a major sub-field of political science and at the core 
of what government is all about. Subjects surveyed include ethics, 
leadership, budgeting, personnel, policy analysis, public versus private 
administration, clientele/stakeholders, bureaucracy, and democracy. 3 
credits. 

POLI/SOC 330. STATISTICS IN SOCIAL SCIENCE 

This course is designed to teach the terminology and methods of descriptive 
statistics and to introduce students to inferential statistics so that political 
science, sociology, social work and criminal justice majors can be informed 
consumers in their fields, carry out basic statistical tests, and to help prepare 
those students who go on to graduate school. 3 credits. 

POLI 334. INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS 

How do we explain, interpret, and understand international relations? Why 
do states go to war or develop weapons of mass destruction? Can global 
institutions create the conditions for cooperation and effective problem-
solving? What are the role of ideas, beliefs, and norms in exercising power or 
reshaping the international system? In this course we will examine enduring 
theoretical debates, consider claims and arguments made by leading 
scholars, and think about the limits and possibilities of social science as the 
means for appreciating the dynamics of world politics. 

POLI 335. AMERICAN FOREIGN POLICY 

Stresses evaluation of U.S. foreign policy and world role. Analyzes how and 
by whom policy is made, its goals, and its domestic/foreign consequences. 
Primary emphasis is on U.S. policy since WWII. 3 credits. 

POLI 336. INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS AND DIPLOMACY 

The existence and prominence of international organizations (IOs), such as 
the United Nations, in today’s world is a remarkable achievement of modern 
diplomacy. In this course we will explore the interworking of several 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 224 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


prominent international organizations that transformed the global political 
landscape since the end of WWII. Additionally the students will engage in 
diplomatic role-playing activities simulating the functions of IOs. Students 
will engage in individual and team research and participate in 
intercollegiate competitions. 3 credits. 

POLI 337. FOREIGN POLICY DECISIONS 

Individuals make foreign policy, but they are constrained by their own 
psychological limits as well as a complex set of institutional rules. Drawing 
from the literature of political psychology, social cognition and 
organizational behavior we explore the most significant actors shaping 
American foreign policy: presidential advisors, the media, the bureaucracy, 
Congress, interest groups and social movements. Social cognition and the 
new institutionalism provide an overarching explanation about the way in 
which decision-makers reason about problems and situations and embed 
those understandings in enduring institutions. We will read accounts of 
some significant decisions in postwar American foreign policy as well as 
participate in a decision-making simulation designed to integrate and 
illustrate key concepts. 

PHIL/POLI 360. PHILOSOPHY OF LAW 

A study of the various philosophical issues and problems that arise in law 
and legal institutions. Special emphasis is placed on examining the ways in 
which law is shaped by distinctly philosophical principles like justice, liberty, 
equality, rights and responsibility. Topics include the relationship between 
law and morality, the unique nature of legal obligation and its connections 
with legitimacy, authority, and citizenship, and problems surrounding the 
interpretation and enforcement of law. Lecture/ discussion. 3 credits. 

POLI 380. POLITICS OF THE GLOBAL ECONOMY 

This course blends perspectives of economics and politics to analyze 
economic relations among state and non-state actors as they pursue their 
interests. This course is designed to provide students with an introduction to 
some of the mainstream approaches to the study of international political 
economy and some of the pressing debates in the field including cross 
border flows of trade, capital, labor, and ideas. These topics will be discussed 
in the context of competing theoretical perspectives, the role of 
international financial institutions (WTO, World Bank and IMF) and the 
views from the Global North (rich nations) and Global South (poor 
countries). 3 credits. 

POLI 395. ENVIRONMENTAL POLITICS 

This class is premised on the belief that environmental problems are 
ultimately political conflicts. Accordingly, we focus not only on the 
substance of environmental issues, but also on the public policy process, and 
on the skills, tactics and factors that influence the outcomes of the policy 
process. 3 credits. 

POLI/PHIL 400. POLITICAL THEORY 

A study of major figures in the history of political theory and their particular 
political theories. The primary purpose of the course is to analyze the 
relationship between political theory and political action. The course covers 
the three general historical periods: ancient, Christian, and modern. Some of 
the political thinkers and theories covered include: Plato, Aristotle, Buddha, 

St. Augustine, Thomas Aquinas, Machiavelli, Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, 
Marx, Burke, and contemporary figures like Voegelin and Rawls. 3 credits. 

POLI 411. SEMINAR: CONTEMPORARY ISSUES IN POLITICS 

Each year the seminar will be focused on a special topic determined by the 
professor who is offering the course. One year the topic might be feminist 
politics; another year the topic might be the Supreme Court; another year 
political psychology might be the focus. 3 credits. 

POLI 421. CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 

Course explores impact of the Supreme Court on the doctrine of Separation 
of Powers and Federalism. Topics include presidential, congressional, and 
judicial powers; inter-branch constitutional relations; and the division of 
power between state and federal governments. Recommended for pre-law 
students. POLI 100 recommended to be taken before taking this course. 3 
credits. 

POLI 422. CIVIL LIBERTIES 

An examination of Supreme Court cases dealing with civil liberties and civil 
rights such as the freedom of speech, religion, assembly, and press. The 
course also covers due process rights and issues related to criminal law are 
examined by analyzing Supreme Court cases. The analysis of civil rights and 
liberties is placed in the context of the American political system and its 
search for ordered liberty. It is recommended that students complete POLI 
100 prior to taking this course. 3 credits. 

POLI 437. POLITICAL SCIENCE PROJECT 

A capstone course designed for senior majors and minors to engage in 
critical reflection on their political and intellectual identity. A series of 
readings, class exercises, and discussions will culminate in a final 
“intellectual memoir” wherein each student examines his or her political 
socialization process, major intellectual commitments and future plans. This 
course is offered every fall semester and must be taken in the fall of the 
senior year. 3 credits. 

POLI 438. SENIOR HONORS THESIS 

Seniors only, and only with permission of the department. Students wishing 
to write a traditional thesis, especially those who plan on attending 
graduate school, are encouraged to discuss their interests with the political 
science faculty. Thesis is normally allowed only after successfully completing 
the Political Science Project course. 3 credits. 

POLI 475-476. INTERNSHIP 

Off-campus experiences in Erie, Washington, D.C., and other sites which are 
individually tailored to promote the student’s career plans. Examples of 
typical placements are law firms, the offices of congressional 
representatives or local officials, government agencies, and mass media 
sites. 3-6 credits. 

POLI 491. AMERICAN PRESIDENCY 

An overview of the development of the modern American presidency. Topics 
include the selection process; the executive branch; and the relationship 
between the president, the press, the Congress, the courts and the public. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 225 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


Also covered are the powers, roles and responsibilities of the president. 3 
credits. 

POLI 492. AMERICAN CONGRESS 

A study of the role of Congress in the American political system. The course 
examines the Framers’ view of legislative power and pays particular 
attention to the role and meaning of representation. The course also covers 
the organization and structure of Congress including the committee system, 
the law making process, and the leadership of each house. 3 credits. 

PSYC 101. INTRO TO PSYCHOLOGY 

A general introduction to the science of behavior and mental processes. 
Topics considered include learning, memory, perception, motivation, 
personality, psychopathology and social interaction. 3 credits. 

PSYC 150. POSITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

This highly experiential and research-based course will examine the 
differing assumptions and questions that result from a change in 
perspective in psychology from decreasing maladaptive emotions and 
behaviors to increasing our capacity to thrive and prosper. Students will 
explore the human strengths, virtues, and skills that make life worth living 
and enable individuals and communities to flourish. 3 credits. 

PSYC 160. CULTURAL PSYCHOLOGY 

In this course, we will examine how the elements of culture affect 
psychological processes including values, traditions, socialization, 
education, language and politics. We will explore which psychological 
theories and findings apply across cultures and which do not, and why. This 
course will also explore the psychological effects of moving between 
cultures and will address the immigrant and refugee experience. Finally, this 
course also aims to develop cross-cultural communication skills. 3 credits. 

PSYC 201. PERSONALITY 

In this course, we will explore the factors that shape personality, including 
biology, motivation, the environment and thought processes. We will also 
explore why personality remains relatively stable, how it may change over 
time, and how psychologists study and use personality traits to predict 
behavior. Prerequisite: PSYC 101. 3 credits. 

PSYC 203. MAJORING IN PSYCHOLOGY 

This course is designed to help sophomore psychology majors begin to chart 
their future in the field and lay the groundwork for life after graduation. 
Specifically, its purpose is to help students further understand themselves, 
their choice of psychology as a major, their potential careers and how these 
interact. Topics such as success in the major, career options, graduate school 
preparation, employment at the bachelor’s level, professional identity, and 
personal development will be explored. Required for sophomore psychology 
majors. 1 credit. 

PSYC 211. ABNORMAL PSYCHOLOGY 

The major forms of psychopathology that appear in childhood and adult life. 
Topics include the symptomatology of mental disorders; their etiology from 
psychological, biological, and sociocultural perspectives; and issues 

pertaining to diagnosis, treatment, ethics, and the legal system. 
Prerequisite: PSYC 101. 3 credits. 

PSYC 221. CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY 

An overview of clinical psychology focusing on the settings, clients, and 
activities of the clinical psychologist. Attention to the assessment and 
treatment of psychopathology and evaluation of the success of 
psychological interventions. Prerequisite: PSYC 101. 3 credits. 

PSYC 222. PSYCHOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT 

An introduction to the principles and problems involved in the assessment 
of human behavior. This course highlights the skills involved in collecting, 
interpreting and integrating data from a variety of sources, such as 
interviews, observations and formal psychological testing. It will emphasize 
how this information is presented through psychological report writing. 
Prerequisites: PSYC 211, PSYC 221. 3 credits. 

PSYC 225. HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY 

This course focuses on the relationship and interaction of the mind and 
body. That is, how psychological functioning relates to illness and disease; 
treatment and outcome; and recovery and cure. In addition, the student will 
be introduced to the impact of age, gender and ethnicity on the availability 
of, use of, and access to health care. The relationship of stress and lifestyle 
on the immune system, wellness and disease will be discussed. The 
psychological and physical interaction of some of today’s major health issues 
such as eating, smoking, drinking, cancer and heart disease are presented 
with a discussion of treatment and outcome. Also, lifetime accommodation 
to chronic illness/disease based on psychological adjustment is reviewed. 
Other topics include: response to terminal illness, adjustment to trauma and 
the current industrialization of health care. Prerequisite: PSYC 101. 3 credits. 

PSYC 231. SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY 

This course examines the social foundations of human thoughts, feelings, 
and behavior by addressing the following aspects of social life: (a) social 
influence; (b) social roles and public behavior; (c) inferences about other 
people; and (d) interpersonal relations and groups. Among the topics to be 
considered are: the influence of public behavior on social norms, persuasion, 
impression management, social emotions, judgment of responsibility and 
character, interpersonal attraction, aggression, altruism, group dynamics, 
and inter-group conflict. The course will concentrate on the level of analysis 
of the individual, but will include sociological and evolutionary perspectives 
where appropriate. Prerequisite: PSYC 101. 3 credits. 

PSYC 232. PSYCHOLOGY OF PREJUDICE* 

This course examines the development and persistence of predjudice, 
stereotyping, and discrimination from a social psychological perspective. It 
provides and overview of theories of predjudice, exposure to relevant 
research, and discussion of prejudice reduction. Readings cover historical, 
cultural, and sociolgoical perspectives of issues related to ethnicity, gender, 
and social class. 3 credits. 

PSYC 233. CROSS-CULTURAL PSYC 

Human beings are inherently cultural, moreso than any other species. This 
course explores the ways in which humans are uniquely built for cultural 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 226 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


learning and how different cultural experiences affect perceptual processes, 
cognition, emotion, personality, self, social interactions, and physical and 
mental health. 3 credits. 

PSYC 235. SPORT PSYCHOLOGY 

This course examines the application of psychological principles to sports 
and to athletes of all levels. Topics include: performance enhancement (i.e, 
mental imagery, self-talk), promoting well-being (i.e., the “recreational 
athlete”), psychopathology in sport and exercise (i.e., eating disorders), 
working with special populations (i.e., children, elite athletes, college 
athletes), and education and training for a career in sport psychology (i.e., 
graduate training, relevant work experience). Prerequisite: PSYC 101. 3 
credits. 

PSYC 236. LEARNING & MOTIVATION 

This course provides an overview on the behavioral and neurobiological 
bases of learning, motivation and memory. Lessons are conveyed through 
discussion of clinical studies on amnesia and other abnormalities with 
humans, as well as through discussion of experimental results obtained by 
behavior analytic, anatomical, electrophysiological and biochemical 
techniques using non-human models. 3 credits. 

PSYC 237. MEMORY AND COGNITION 

This course provides a survey of research into such human mental processes 
as perception, attention, memory, language, decision making and creativity. 
It explores the domain of cognitive psychology (part of an active 
interdisciplinary approach known as cognitive science), a vibrant sub-field in 
psychology that emphasizes people’s mental processes and knowledge. 
Prerequisite: PSYC 101. 3 credits. 

PSYC 239. LEARNING & MOTIVATION LAB* 

Experimental coursework corequisite to Learning and Motivation. 
Corequisite: PSYC 236. 1 credit. 

PSYC 240. PSYCHOLOGY & THE LAW 

The application of psychological principles, research and knowledge to legal 
issues and proceedings is growing rapidly. This course will deal broadly with 
the interface between psychology and the law. As such it will critically 
investigate the wide range of contemporary applications of psychology to a 
variety of topics including: understanding the origins and treatment of 
criminally deviant behavior, psychological autopsies, criminal profiling, jury 
selection, eye witness testimony, repressed memory, persuasive 
communication in the courtroom, child abuse investigations, competence 
determination and the insanity defense. Prerequisite: PSYC 101. 3 credits. 

PSYC 241. DEVELOP PSYC:CHILDHOOD 

This course covers an area in psychology known as developmental 
psychology, which is the scientific study of age-related changes in behavior, 
thinking, emotions and social relationships. The focus is on childhood, from 
conception to the teenage years. Areas of development include physical, 
cognitive and socio-emotional. The role of biological, maturational and 
socio-cultural influences on development are considered. This course is 
solidly grounded in psychological theory. Basic issues in development are 

explored, and research methodologies and findings are emphasized. 
Prerequisite: PSYC 101. 3 credits. 

PSYC 242. DEVELOP PSYC:ADOLESCENCE 

This course covers the area of developmental psychology and will focus 
exclusively on that part of the lifespan know as adolescence (or, “the second 
decade of life”). A multi-disciplinary approach is utilized to examine how 
individuals develop from childhood into mature adulthood. Grounded in 
theory and empirical research, the course will cover fundamental changes 
(e.g., puberty, social transitions), contexts (e.g., families, peer groups), and 
psychosocial developmental issues (e.g., achievement, intimacy) associated 
with adolescence. In addition, basic issues in development are explored, and 
research methodologies and findings are emphasized. Prerequisite: PSYC 

101. 3 credits. 
PSYC 252. BIOPSYCHOLOGY 

This course explores the biological basis of behavior and experience, 
including the role of the brain in emotions, learning, memory, motivation, 
sleep, perception, consciousness, and psychological disorders. The course 
also considers how the brain recovers from damage. Prerequisite: PSYC 101. 
3 credits. 

PSYC 253. DRUGS AND HUMAN BEHAVIOR 

This course covers basic principles of psychopharmacology, including the 
effects of stimulants, depressants, opioids, psychedelics, cannabis, as well as 
alcohol, caffeine and tobacco. Also considered is the nature of addiction and 
modalities of treatment and prevention of drug abuse. Prerequisite: PSYC 

101. 3 credits. 
PSYC 265. PSYCHOLOGY OF GENDER 

Issues of female and male psychology are examined with a consideration of 
both the similarities and differences between women and men and how 
these characteristics influence behavior, cognitive abilities, and physical and 
psychological health. Theoretical perspectives on sex and gender are 
explored, as well as the research methods for comparing the sexes. 3 credits. 

PSYC 274. PSYCHOLOGY IN FILM 

The main goal of this course is to explore different areas of psychology 
through film. We will evaluate the accuracy of the ways in which 
psychology is depicted in the movies by comparing it to actual psychological 
research. We consider a variety of psychological processes—motivation, 
personality, sensation, perception, memory, intelligence, moral decision-
making, learning, stress, love, obedience, psychopathology, therapy, and so 
on—and use classic and contemporary feature films as a laboratory to shed 
light on those processes. Prerequisite: PSYC 101. 3 credits. 

PSYC 281. BEHAVIOR MODIFICATION 

This course introduces the major themes underpinning the behavioral 
approach to constructing healthy behavior repertoires. In addition to 
considering methods of behavioral assessment, the course surveys a variety 
of treatment modalities, including contingency management, token 
economies, exposure therapies, modeling, cognitive behavioral therapies, 
and acceptance and mindfulness-based interventions. Ethical principles as 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 227 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


well as applications to medical disorders and to community problems are 
also considered. Prerequisite: PSYC 101. 3 credits. 

PSYC 282. BASIC PRINCIPLES OF ABA 

This course provides an introduction to the basic principles of behavior, 
according to both operant and respondent conditioning paradigms. It covers 
the key dimensions of human behavior, the environmental factors involved 
in operant conditioning, and the tools and techniques developed to 
measure, record, and analyze resulting data. The functional relevance of 
behavior is explored so that ethical behavior change procedures may 
promote lasting change in a variety of clinical, organizational, and social 
contexts. Prerequisite: PSYC 281. 3 credits. 

PSYC 283. BEH RSRCH:SINGLE SUBJ DES 

This course will examine the multiple facets of behavioral research. 
Emphasis is placed on understanding, conceptualizing, applying, and 
critically analyzing behavioral research methodologies. Special emphasis 
will be placed on the analysis, strategies, tactics, and application of single 
subject research methodologies related to research-based educational and 
clinical practices. This course will also covers professional ethics. 
Prerequisite: PSYC 282. 3 credits. 

PSYC 284. ADV PRINCIPLES OF ABA 

This course provides a series of “practical” extensions to the preceding 
courses in the ABA sequence. We examine key concepts derived from the 
behavior analytic literature, while being introduced to specific behavior 
change procedures and strategies based on systematic applications of 
behavioral principles. These procedures will rely heavily on gaining control 
over environmental factors, such as reinforcement and motivational 
variables, to support positive behavior change across environments in which 
the psychologist will likely work. Prerequisite: PSYC 283. 3 credits. 

PSYC 290. STATISTICS FOR PSYCHOLOGY* 

An introduction to the use of statistics in psychology and the social sciences. 
Topics include measurement scales, hypothesis testing, descriptive statistics, 
concepts and procedures in statistical inference (including t-tests and 
analysis of variance), correlation and prediction, and nonparametric tests. 3 
credits. 

PSYC 294. INDUSTRIAL/ORGANIZA PSYC 

This course applies psychological concepts and methods to problems of 
personnel management, employee motivation and productivity, supervisory 
leadership, and organizational development. 3 credits. 

PSYC 301. HISTORY OF PSYCHOLOGY 

A study of changing views of psychology from Descartes to the present, with 
emphasis on the influence of ideas and methodologies on the evolution of 
systems and theories of psychological thought during the past century. The 
course is a capstone experience helping the psychology major integrate the 
diversity of contemporary psychology. Prerequisite: Senior in Psychology or 
permission of the instructor. 3 credits. 

PSYC 310. RES DESGN&STAT ANALYSIS I* 

An introduction to the statistical, experimental and descriptive research 
methods in psychology. Topics include how to conduct literature searches, 

the American Psychological Association (APA) style of writing, the research 
process, ethics and bias in research and experimental/non-experimental 
research design. Statistical topics include measurement scales, hypothesis 
testing, descriptive statistics, and concepts and procedures in statistical 
inference. 3 credits. 

PSYC 311. RES DES&STAT ANLYS I LAB* 

Experimental coursework corequisite to RDSA I. Corequisite: PSYC 310. 1 
credit. 

PSYC 312. RES DESGN&STAT ANALYSIS II* 

A continutation of RDSA I, this course further explores statistical, 
experimental, and descriptive research techniques in Psychology. Students 
learn statistical tests such as t-tests, analysis of variance, and correlation and 
explore in more detail the structural components of experimental designs. 
Students apply course material by replicating a study and presenting their 
results in both a full written APA-style research report and in an oral (poster 
or presentation) format. 3 credits. 

PSYC 313. RES DES&STAT ANLYS II LAB* 

Experimental coursework corequisite to RDSA II. Corequisite: PSYC 312. 1 
credit. 

PSYC 321. TOPICS IN DEVELOPMENTAL PSYCH 

This seminar course focuses on in-depth coverage of a specific area of 
developmental psychology, such as cognitive development, developmental 
psychopathology or socio-emotional development. Readings of primary 
sources, group discussion of that research, oral presentations and written 
papers are major components of the course. Prerequisite: PSYC 241 or 242 
or instructor permission. 3 credits. 

PSYC 323. COUNSELING THEORY & SKILLS* 

This course is for students considering a career in human services and 
mental health professions. It surveys the major theories that inform 
therapeutic practice and guides students in the process of integrating 
theories and techinques that are consonant with their personal style. This 
course will particularly benefit students majoring in psychology, social work, 
art therapy, and other disciplines which prepare the student for interaction 
with a population in need of positive mental health intervention. 
Prequisite: PSYC 101. 3 credits. 

PSYC 331. TOPICS IN SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY 

An advanced course in social psychology, taught in a seminar style, covering 
special topics of current issues in social psychology. Students will have an 
opportunity to explore an area of social psychology in depth by reading 
current articles and discussing research findings. Prerequisite: PSYC 231 or 
permission of the instructor. 3 credits. 

PSYC 341. DEVELOPMTL PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 

This course examines and explores the etiology, diagnosis and treatment of 
psychopathology in children and adolescents. Content includes coverage of 
a variety of psychological disorders, such as anxiety disorders, mood 
disorders, autism spectrum disorders, language/learning disabilities, mental 
retardation, and asthma and diabetes. Focus is on the developmental 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 228 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


psychopathology perspective, which endorses that abnormal development 
occurs along dynamic pathways, with links to both the past and future. An 
exploration of the social and cultural contexts in which children experience 
life is also examined. Prerequisite: PSYC 211 or PSYC 241 or PSYC 242. 3 
credits. 

PSYC 350. ANTECEDENTS OF AGGRESSION 

Aggressive behavior and violence is an issue of great concern for the mental 
health and criminal justice systems, as well as society. This course explores 
the biological, psychological and social factors involved, as well as their 
interaction in children, adolescents and adults. Emphasis is placed on 
controlling aggression, assessing and managing violence risk, and 
prevention and treatment strategies with a juvenile population. 
Prerequisite: PSYC 101. 3 credits. 

PSYC 352. TOPICS IN NEUROSCIENCE 

This seminar course will provide depth to the neurosciences through student 
and instructor discussion. Primary source research will be presented and 
discussed in great detail. Topics may include, but are not limited to the 
following: electrophysiology, neuropharmacology, drug abuse, systems 
level analysis, neurology, specific psychological disorders, and biostatistics. 
Prerequisite: PSYC 252 or permission of the instructor. 3 credits. 

PSYC 390. INDEPENDENT STUDY 

The independent study experience provides an opportunity for highly 
motivated students to explore an area of interest one-on-one with a faculty 
member. 1-3 credits. 

PSYC 473. PSYCHOLOGY INTERNSHIP 

An opportunity for students to get specific job related training and/or to 
apply concepts learned in coursework to a psychology-related community 
placement. 0-3 credits. 

PSYC 475. PSYCHOLOGY INTERNSHIP 

An opportunity for students to get specific job related training and/or to 
apply concepts learned in coursework to a psychology-related community 
placement. 200 hours. 3 credits. 

PSYC 476. PSYC INTERNSHIP 

An opportunity for students to get specific job related training and/or to 
apply concepts learned in coursework to a psychology-related community 
placement. 400 hours. 6 credits. 

PSYC 480. CURRENT ISSUES 

Students lead an in-depth exploration of a selected topic in contemporary 
psychology. Topics change each year; past topics have included evolutionary 
psychology, affective forecasting, psychoneuroimmunology, flow, 
automaticity, and self-justification. Prerequisite: PSYC 101. 0 credits. 

PSYC 490. SENIOR RESEARCH PRACTICUM 

The student designs, executes and presents an original research project. 
Prerequisites: minimum GPA 3.0, senior standing, psychology major, and 
permission from the sponsoring faculty member, the student’s academic 
advisor, and department chair. 3 credits. 

PSYC 525. PSYC IN HEALTH CARE* 

This course prepares the Physician Assistant student for the mental health 
rotation by providing a foundation of the major psychological disorders as 
they present across the lifespan. Students develop knowledge of clinical 
presentations, use of the DSM-5, pathophysiology, potential medical 
complications and phramacological and nonpharmacological therapeutic 
internventions inclusive of cultural perspectives for the psycholgoical 
disorders. The psychosocial and bheavioral processes in health, illness and 
health care are introduced and resources presented for the patient, 
caregiver/family and provider for health promotion. 3 credits. 

PUBH 101. FOUNDATIONS PUBLIC HEALTH 

Public health is both a discipline and a perspective on human health, with 
an emphasis on the health of populations and groups rather than on 
individual patients. This focus on serving the needs of populations and 
emphasis on prevention over traditional medicine approaches presents 
economic, political and ethical challenges to public health workers and 
researchers. Public health requires a unique skill set that pulls from 
statistics, demography and biology to the social sciences and public policy. 
This course will focus on the core areas of public health practice including 
chronic disease prevention, transmission of infectious diseases, health 
promotion, disease-related research and environmental health. 3credits. 

PUBH 102. PROFESSIONALISM PUBLC HLTH 

A critical component for a successful career in public health is being able to 
function in a professional environment. This course teaches students about 
the basic expectations of professional environments and how best to carry 
themselves in professional environments to succeed. The course teaches 
students about professional expectations regarding work ethic, working on 
teams, turning in quality work, meeting deadlines, handling disputes, 
presenting their work, handling competing obligations and time 
management. 3 credits. 

PUBH 105. HEALTH POLICY & LAW 

Americans eat more, work more, and exercise less than the citizens of all 
other developed nations. As a result, the prevalence of chronic disease is 
higher in the U.S. than all European countries and U.S. health care costs are 
the highest in the world. The U.S. doesn’t have a health care problem—it 
has a public health problem. “Health care” and “public health” have 
developed in silos despite the fact that both fields are fundamentally tied to 
one another. This course provides students with a framework to think 
systematically about the determinants of health, the problems linking 
public health and physician and hospital-based health care, and the 
strategies available to governments and policymakers for addressing these 
matters. The course emphasizes contemporary topics that are important in 
the health policy debates of virtually all nations and provides cross-national 
comparisons of public health and health care systems. 3credits. 

PUBH 109. HEALTH EDUCATION 

A critical role of public health is to promote and transform the health of 
populations. During this course, theories and models that explain health 
behaviors and outcomes are described, and successes and failures of past 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 229 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


and present health promotion initiatives are discussed. Students learn the 
ethical, philosophical, theoretical and practical reasons for improving the 
health of people and their communities as well as the key elements of 
planning and implementing effective health promotion programs. 
Opportunities for applying health education and promotion methods cross 
settings and sectors of communities. Careers and educational pathways for 
health educators are also reviewed. 3credits. 

PUBH 201. ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH 

Environmental Health is an introduction to the role of environmental 
exposures in human health and disease. Though the focus is on humans, 
because the human ecological footprint is expanding and has few natural 
boundaries, the impacts of human activities on the broader environment 
and non-human systems are equally important to our understanding of the 
role of environment on health. It is an applied science course that will focus 
on finding solutions to the many challenges posed by environmental health 
hazards including chemical, biological and radiation exposures at work, at 
home and at play—and the choices we must make to minimize personal 
exposures while participating in an expanding global economy. A major 
emphasis is on understanding the role of public health in environmental 
health science while linking these disciplines to broader goals of preserving 
environmental quality and protecting human health. 3credits. 

PUBH 211. GLOBAL HEALTH 

A person born in Japan can expect to live to 83 while a person born in 
Swaziland is unlikely to see their 32nd birthday. There are dramatic 
differences in the health and well being of populations around the world. 
What explains these disparities and what can be done about them? These 
questions and more are fundamental to the core of global health. This 
course will use case studies, interactive exercises and simulations to teach 
students the core principles of global health while encouraging them to 
think globally and act locally. Students will learn about cutting-edge 
methodologies in global health including the use of mobile phones to 
monitor health, the use of Gapminder software to study population health 
trends, and modeling techniques to simulate the impact of proposed public 
health policy interventions. 3 credits. 

PUBH 260. PRIN OF EPIDEMIOLOGY I 

From its foundations in the London Cholera epidemic of 1854 to emerging 
epidemics around the globe, epidemiology is an investigative health science 
using the clues around us to better understand the cause of disease 
outbreaks and to develop effective strategies for promoting and protecting 
public health. The science of epidemiology is concerned with measurement, 
study design and methods which will provide “disease detectives” a solid 
base of evidence upon which to make decisions about health policy, 
treatment of diseases and to establish public health priorities. This course 
will introduce this exciting science through data exercises, case studies and 
hands-on investigation, which require skill, knowledge and quick thinking 
to get the job done. 3 credits. 

PUBH 261. PRINCIPLES OF EPIDEMIOLOGY II 

Epidemiology is a complex field with rigorous methodologies. This course 
will build on Principles of Epidemiology I to provide students with an 
advanced knowledge of methods and tool to track disease cause and spread. 

Students will engage in a series of projects and case studies to gain exposure 
in using the data and tools used by epidemiologists in the field. 
Prerequisites: PUBH 240, PUBH 260. 3 credits. 

PUBH 280. MENTAL HLTH&PSYC EPIDEMIOL 

This course will focus on public mental health and the basic epidemiology of 
neurological and psychiatric diseases through a series of weekly case 
studies. The course will also address suicide, injury and violence as public 
health problems and related prevention strategies. Students will also 
receive training in basic Mental Health First Aid and other public health 
approaches to mental health. 3 credits. 

PUBH 283. HEALTH SECURITY 

Health security addresses the overlap between infectious disease outbreaks 
and other complex emergencies and concerns about national security 
including threats related to bioterrorism and emerging infectious diseases 
both domestically and abroad. Increasingly, controlling epidemics requires 
coordination among multiple agencies both to stop the spread of disease 
and avoid political, social and economic disruptions. 3 credits. 

PUBH 290. SOCIAL DETERMINANTS IN HEALTH 

Social and economic conditions are currently the best predictors of health 
outcomes in the United States, and improvements in living conditions better 
explain gains in human life expectancy than improvements in medicine 
alone. The links between social structures (risk conditions) and lifestyles 
(risk factors) are explored. The impact of risk conditions, such as income and 
education, on health outcomes are reviewed and compared across 
communities and cultures. Students are introduced to emerging theories 
and research on the social determinants of health. The benefits and costs of 
decreasing inequity and injustice as well as increasing equity and justice are 
critically analyzed. 3 credits. 

PUBH 295. HEALTH EVALUATION, RESEARCH METHODS &ANALYSIS 

The application of evaluation methods begins prior to project 
implementation and continues well after the conclusion of the project. A 
cultural movement toward increased accountability has elevated the value 
of evaluating policies, practices, and environments in medicine and public 
health. Evaluation skills enable professionals to develop evidence-based 
practices, adapt practices based on evidence, and win funding. Results 
support scaling and sustainability of efficient and effect strategies. 3 credits. 

PUBH 311. PRINCIPLES OF EPIDEMIOLOGY II 

Epidemiology is a complex field with rigorous methodologies. This course 
will build on Principles of Epidemiology I to provide students with an 
advanced knowledge of methods to track disease cause and spread. 
Students will learn how to diagnose and address threats to validity in 
epidemiologic study designs. They will learn to model comples multivariable 
problems using both parametric and nonparametric statistics. The method 
covered will include analyses of proportions, rates, and time to failure as 
well as parametric models for hazard functions and proportional hazards 
regression. Prerequisites: PUBH260, PUBH 261. 3 credits. 

PUBH 475. PUBLIC HEALTH FLD EXPERIENCE 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 230 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


Experiential learning is a critical for students to develop the competencies in 
public health that will enable them to have successful careers. The public 
health field experience is an intensive field work experience that allows 
students to gain real experience working on a community-based public 
health project or with a public health agency or an organization that has a 
public health mission. 3credits. 

PUBH 490. PUBLIC HEALTH SR RESRCH PRAC 

Experiential learning is a critical for students to develop the competencies in 
public health that will enable them to have successful careers. The public 
health research practicum is for advanced students that wish to pursue 
independent or group research projects under faculty mentorship. Students 
must propose a research project and obtain both faculty and IRB approval 
for their research prior to enrolling in the course. 3 credits. 

RIAP 177. INTRO INTELLIGENCE STUDIES 

This survey course introduces the student to the discipline of intelligence 
and provides the student with an understanding of how intelligence 
systems function, how they fit within the policymaking systems of free 
societies, and how they are managed and controlled. The course will provide 
a theoretical overview of the intelligence, including psychology of 
intelligence, types of intelligence methods, tools and techniques, basic 
writing and briefing skills, basic data management strategies and tools and 
various types of intelligence used throughout the private and public sectors. 
3 credits. 

RIAP 178. INTEL METHODS & ANALYSIS 

This course introduces students to the collection and analysis techniques 
used by entry level analysts. Students work on a term-long project that 
incorporates data basing, collection planning, organizational and link 
analysis, and structured analysis techniques. Computer software programs 
are used to enhance that analytical product. A threaded discussion of the 
psychology of intelligence analysis is integrated into course material. 
Prerequisite: RIAP 177. 3 credits. 

RIAP 213. NATIONAL SECURITY & INTEL 

This course is an introduction to national security decision-making in the 
United States with a special emphasis on the role of intelligence in 
formulating policy. Students will engage in a historical overview of national 
security politics and strategy since WWII and describe major institutions and 
processes involved in national security policy-making. The course is 
designed to survey significant national security problems and their changing 
nature in the 21st century. 3 credits. 

RIAP 240. INTELLIGENCE FOR BUSINESS 

This course explores the processes involved in providing foreknowledge of a 
company’s competitors, industry dynamics and macro-environmental 
factors that impact an organization; the precursors to actionable intelligence 
and strategy. The class introduces business terminology, analytical business 
models and other resources that organizations utilize in the process of 
competitive and market intelligence. Students will develop competitive 
assessments to assist corporate decision makers in making decisions and 
develop corporate strategy. Lectures, exercises, and projects are applied to a 
real company project with the goal to gain competitive advantage and/or 

minimize risks related to the current business climate. Prerequisite: RIAP 

178. 3 credits. 
RIAP 250. PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION 

Students in the Intelligence Studies program are about to enter what is 
often a large and complex professional world. In order to navigate that 
world, particularly in the search for employment, students need to learn 
how to make the most of the professional communication process. During 
this course, students will learn how to write an effective resumé, to write a 
cover letter that best expresses their goals and capabilities, to undergo a job 
interview and to communicate in a professional setting. 1 credit. 

RIAP 275. INTEL WRITING&PRESENTATION 

This course introduces students to the fundamentals of effective intelligence 
writing and presentation. Emphasis is placed on the variety of forms of 
intelligence writing, briefing styles, and evaluations of intelligence products 
for form and substance, and application of numerous advanced analytical 
techniques. Prerequisite: RIAP 178. 3 credits. 

RIAP 276. LAW ENFORCEMENT INTEL 

This course is an introduction to law enforcement intelligence definitions, 
agencies, and methodologies of analysis. It reviews the mission and roles of 
the crime analyst at the local, state and federal levels. Prerequisite: RIAP 

178. 3 credits. 
RIAP 280. COMMUNICATNG INTL ANALY I* 

This course examines the skills needed to effectively communicate 
intelligence analysis results to a decisionmaker. Through repetitive 
application of the focused set of skills needed for that communication, it 
prepares intelligence analysts to deliver analysis in a variety of written and 
oral formats. Students will also be assigned readings on best ways to 
prepare and develop a written intelligence product and to prepare and 
present an oral briefing making best use of presentation tools such as 
PowerPoint and Prezi. Students will also become familiar with visualization 
tools available for presentations and reports. 2 credits. 

RIAP 281. COMMUNICATNG INTL ANALY II* 

This course examines the skills needed to effectively communicate 
intelligence analysis results to a decisionmaker. It builds on skills learned in 
Communicating Intelligence Analysis I (CIA1) by adding a defined 
intelligence tasking that students will pursue the entire term. Students will 
produce and deliver written and oral analytic reports on the assigned 
tasking. They will be graded for adherence to effective communication skills 
learned in CIA1 and for the quality of their analysis. Students will develop 
increased familiarity with structured analytic methods learned in other RIAP 
courses and will apply new methods to these products. 2 credits. 

RIAP 303. AMERICAN MILITARY HISTORY 

This course covers the basics of the U.S. military history experience from the 
colonial period through contingency operations of the 1990s. This course 
will employ American military history as a tool for studying military 
professionalism and for applying critical thinking skills and decision-making 
skills to military problems. This course provides both the historical 
foundation and context for service in today's military and a kind of survey 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 231 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


course preparing students for future study in military history and heritage. 3 
credits. 

RIAP 305. WARFARE&MILITARY INTELL 

This course explores the role of intelligence in the conduct and prosecution 
of armed conflict. The course traces the evolution of modern military 
organizations and the use of intelligence in the success or failure of these 
organizations. Current intelligence practices and methods employed by the 

U.S. military are also discussed. 3 credits. 
RIAP 310. SPECIAL TOPICS 

This course allows students to pursue a specific area of interest that 
augments their analysis experience. Topics vary. Past topics have included 
data visualization, geospatial intelligence and intelligence collection. 3 
credits. 

RIAP 311. COLLECTION OPERATIONS 

This course is designed to help young analysts appreciate the difficulties and 
capabilities of various intelligence collection assets. Students will gain an 
appreciation of and familiarization with various techniques from each of the 
major collection disciplines including open source intelligence, human 
intelligence, signals intelligence, measurements and signatures intelligence 
and geospatial intelligence. 3 credits. 

RIAP 312. SOC MEDIA INTEL & ANALYSIS 

This course introduces students to the collection and analysis techniques 
used in the analysis of social media. Students will be exposed to critical 
theory with regards to social media including basic techniques in collection 
and analysis. Open source computer software programs are used to enhance 
individual analytical products. A threaded discussion of the psycho-socio 
aspects of intelligence analysis of social media is integrated into course 
material. 3 credits. 

RIAP 316. CINEMATIC MIRROR INTL FILM 

This course takes an historical approach to the depiction of various 
manifestations of “intelligence” in film, spanning over eight decades of 
filmmaking in different countries. 3 credits. 

RIAP 317. DATA VISUALIZATION 

A hands-on course in data analysis and visualization based on key design 
principles and techniques for interactively visualizing data based on 
principles from the fields of statistics, perception, graphic design, cognition, 
communication and data mining. Through lecture, case studies and design 
studios, students will work individually and collaboratively to visualize 
complex datasets using software applications to identify patterns, trends, 
and variation across categories, space, and time. Students will obtain 
practical experience with the visualization of complex data including 
multivariate data, geospatial data, textual data, time series and network 
data. 3 credits. 

RIAP 320. ADV LAW ENFORCEMENT INTEL 

This course will explore the theory and practical application of analytical 
methodologies to selected law enforcement intelligence topics. It will utilize 
the case studies methodology to understand the role and effect that 

intelligence influenced the out-come of historical events. Classroom projects 
will require critical thinking skills to produce an analytical intelligence 
product for law enforcement decision makers. Prerequisite: RIAP 276. 3 
credits. 

RIAP 321. LAW&ETHICS LAW ENFRC INTEL* 

The Law and Ethics of Law Enforcement Intelligence course builds upon the 
prerequisite introduction course of RIAP 276. The class will explore the 
governing laws, rules and regulations plus ethics associated with law 
enforcement intelligence. 3 credits. 

RIAP 322. APP METH LAW ENFORCE INTEL* 

The Applied Methodologies for Law Enforcement Intelligence course builds 
upon the prerequisite introduction course of RIAP 276. The class will learn 
and apply advanced applied structured analytical methodologies commonly 
utilized in law enforcement intelligence. 3 credits. 

RIAP 325. CYBER THREAT ANALYSIS 

This course will introduce students to the methodology of investigation and 
analysis procedures associated in the application of real world cyber attacks. 
Students will gain knowledge of key terminology, online tools used by 
analysts, the development of legislation, key government agency roles, and 
the nature of cyber threats/attacks. 3 credits. 

RIAP 360. FINANCIAL INTEL ANALYSIS 

This course explores the theory and application of intelligence in the 
conduct of identifying and mitigating financial threats and crimes by 
governments, the private sector, and other inter-governmental 
organizations. The course also traces the evolution of financial fraud and 
threat financing since 9/11, examining tactics, techniques, and mechanisms 
used both by state and non-state actors involved in illicit financial activity 
and those involved in detecting, preventing, and investigating those illegal 
activities. Working in small groups, the students will apply relevant analytic 
methods and techniques to a series of practical exercises and case studies 
related to financial crime and threat financing. Prerequisites: RIAP 177, RIAP 
178, RIAP 275, RIAP 276. 3 credits. 

RIAP 365. ADVANCED COMPETITIVE INTEL 

This course encompasses a more in-depth perspective of competitive and 
market intelligence utilizing additional analytical tools and methodology. 
Advanced models and techniques are applied to a term-long industry 
project and a final report is compiled at the end of the course. Teams 
representing companies within the industry participate in a stock market 
exercise, scenario analysis and war gaming to gain experience in the 
dynamics and workings of the business environment. 3 credits. 

RIAP 368. CLIMATE CHNG&NATL SECURITY* 

Despite the national debate, global temperatures and sea levels are rising 
creating unique security concerns, but also areas of opportunity. This course 
will cover how a nation anticipates and prepares for a changing global 
landscape and how they reconcile scientific research to policy and security 
goals. 3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 232 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


RIAP 372. TERRORISM 

This course fosters an understanding of the roots, development and impact 
of contemporary worldwide terrorism, especially in the United States, while 
using a simulated operational environment. 3 credits. 

RIAP 374. HISTORY OF INTELLIGENCE 

This course examines the scope, elements and history of intelligence 
activities, especially the American experience. Particular attention is paid to 
the role of intelligence in a democratic society. 3 credits. 

RIAP 395. GEOSPATIAL INTELLIGENCE 

This course will cover topics related to the collection, exploitation and 
analysis of geospatial information and imagery. The focus of the course will 
be on how to use software and knowledge of geospatial concepts to respond 
to a variety intelligence requirements that arise from fields that range from 
military and law enforcement to business, humanitarian issues, and other 
security issues. The emphasis is on the choice and application of appropriate 
methods for the analysis of the spatial and imagery data often encountered 
in the various intelligence disciplines. 3 credits. 

RIAP 420. ADV ANALYTIC TECHNIQUES* 

This course is designed to provide an opportunity for students to explore 
techniques emerging from the intelligence community and physical and 
social sciences and apply those techniques to intelligence problems. 
Focusing on a variety of techniques from a variety of disciplines, this course 
will expose an advanced student to new and potentially useful methods for 
conducting intelligence analysis. 3 credits. 

RIAP 425. STRATEGIC INTELLIGENCE 

This course is divided into three parallel tracks covering strategic theory, the 
practice of strategic intelligence, and the application of those principles to a 
“real life” problem. Analysts will participate throughout the course as a 
member of a group in a large-scale estimative project. Prerequisite: RIAP. 3 
credits. 

RIAP 435. GRAND STRATEGY/PLAN&INTEL 

This course examines the theory and practice of grand strategy and how 
intelligence informs the process of forming and executing it. Beginning with 
a historical view of grand strategy from the post-Napoleonic War period 
(1815-1914), the course then covers Interwar and Cold War grand strategy, 
post-Cold War grand strategy and American grand strategy today in the age 
of terror. The course concludes with workshops on strategy formulation and 
a real-life simulation of a crisis event in which students are expected to 
discern, formulate, and implement an American grand strategy of their 
own. 3 credits. 

RIAP 448. MKT RESEARCH&PRIMARY INTEL* 

This course is designed to provide a comprehensive overview of the 
principles and fundamentals of market research and primary intelligence. 
The course includes the study of both the qualitative and quantitative 
methods used in contemporary market research along with the tools and 
techniques used in the collection, analysis and measurement of data. The 
course is organized from a management perspective using an applied, 
problem analysis format. A real life research project will be used to reinforce 

the theoretical concepts presented during the term. The course is student-
oriented with a focused learning approach. Accordingly, it is taught from an 
applied perspective to challenge and help students to understand the role, 
importance, and operational fit of market research in the workplace. The use 
of technology is emphasized with emphasis on research via the internet, 
development of an on-line survey and SPSS for statistical evaluation. 
Students are expected to take an active role and participate in class 
discussions, interactive assignments, and team/group exercises. 3 credits. 

RIAP 449. NONPROLIFERATION ANALYSIS 

Students in this course will examine the many aspects of nonproliferation. 
Topics will include basic physics, the nuclear fuel cycle, the Nuclear 
Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT), the International Atomic Energy Agency 
(IAEA), the Additional Protocol, safeguards (including an overview of 
verification techniques and the use of open-source information), export 
control, proliferation incentives (and disincentives), nonproliferation trends, 
and nuclear terrorism. Two case studies will explore the nuclear black 
market and proliferation. 3 credits. 

RIAP 475. INTEL STUDIES INTERNSHIP 

Students engage in a period of employment (minimum of 200 hours) as an 
intelligence analyst with a government, international agency or corporation 
during which certain experience objectives must be met. Prerequisite: RIAP 

178. 3 credits. 
RLST 100. WHAT IS RELIGION? 

An introduction that provides students with the foundational skills of the 
academic study of religion in order to apply them to an increased 
understanding of the role of religion in contemporary society. The course 
presents a broad overview that will provide students with a foundation for 
topical courses in the religious studies department as well as the ability to 
engage religion thoughtfully and knowledgably in other disciplines. 3 
credits. 

RLST 110. SACRED TEXTS 

An introduction to religious studies that examines the origins and 
developments of sacred texts. The course will focus especially on how later 
texts and traditions reconfigure earlier traditions in the light of new 
experiences. By the end of the term the student will have developed the 
skills necessary to become a close and careful reader of primary texts. 3 
credits. 

RLST 115. WORLD RELIGIONS 

An introduction to religious studies that inquires into the history of religions 
by focusing on several world religious traditions and their claims about 
Ultimate Reality, the purpose of human life, the meaning of suffering and 
alienation, the importance and role of social organization, and ethics. 3 
credits. 

RLST 200. CONTEMP MORAL ISSUES 

Course explores moral issues both personal and social, in light of Christian 
Scriptures, tradition and human experience. A Roman Catholic perspective 
on these issues is emphasized. 3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 233 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


RLST 205. WESTERN CHRISTIAN HERITAGE 

This course examines the impact of significant Christian thinkers on Western 
culture. As we will see, the development of a Western Christian heritage was 
neither monolithic nor predetermined. It is rather the historical result of 
argument and debate among a plurality of voices throughout the centuries. 
We will explore the influence these voices have on the way various 
contemporary Christians groups conceptualize theology and authority. 3 
credits. 

RLST 206. HINDUISM 

An historical and thematic introduction to Hinduism which will examine its 
array of beliefs and morals, myths and rituals, philosophies and poetry, 
gurus and teachers, gods and goddesses. Particular attention will be given 
to developments in Hinduism including the host of philosophical, historical, 
social and political contexts that have generated plural expressions of 
Hinduism in India and have contributed to a more global expression of 
Hinduism worldwide. 3 credits. 

RLST 207. BUDDHISM 

An introduction to the various world views encompassed under the rubric of 
Buddhism. This course surveys religious, philosophical and ritual 
developments in the history of Buddhism, beginning in the Indian context 
and extending throughout Asia and even into the West. The nature of 
reality, human community, suffering and liberation articulated in various 
versions of Buddhism will be primary themes for study. 3 credits. 

RLST 208. ISLAM 

A study of the origins and development of Islam, beginning from the 
prophet Muhammad to the contemporary era. Special consideration of 
Islam’s religious, social, and philosophical developments, the diversity 
within Islam, and the interface of Islam as it penetrated into cultures beyond 
the Arabian peninsula. 3 credits. 

RLST 210. NEW TEST & CHRISTIAN ORIGINS 

This course engages the foundational documents of Christianity and 
examines how these texts emerged over time as an authoritative collection 
that came to be regarded as Scripture. In addition to contextualizing these 
documents in their indigenous religious/philosophical/cultural 
environments, special attention will be paid to the formation of diverse 
early Christian communities based on differences in their use of a 
multiplicity of Jesus traditions. 3 credits. 

RLST 230. JESUS THE CHRIST 

An examination of the development of images, concepts, and doctrines 
about Jesus of Nazareth. It moves chronologically from New Testament 
materials to contemporary theological discussions about the person and 
message of Jesus and their significance for the post-modern world. 3 credits. 

RLST 235. THE SACRED & CINEMA 

Film has become the dominant medium of popular cultural expression in the 
contemporary era, and as such offers a vital space where the recontextualization 
and re-interpretation of religious themes can be studied. 
Understanding the use and presence of religious ideas and symbols in film 

allows perspective on how traditional religious themes are imagined and 
challenged through contemporary experience. 3 credits. 

RLST 250. EASTERN PHILOSOPHY 

This course examines various traditions of Indian philosophy, specifically the 
“orthodox” schools (the so-called “six views”) and their Buddhist 
counterpoints. Our concern will be the methods, presuppositions, 
arguments, and goals in Indian reflection on the nature of the human 
person (philosophical anthropology), the nature of reality (metaphysics), 
and the nature and process of knowing (epistemology). The goals of this 
course include showing the traditions of systematic, critical thinking in India 
and highlighting, where appropriate, their significant parallels to Western 
philosophical thought. 3 credits. 

RLST 255. RELIG PERSP HUMAN RELATION 

This course will examine the many ways religious and cultural traditions 
have interpreted the dynamics of human relationships, including (but not 
limited to): concepts of relating to oneself, to others (or, friendship), 
relationships with divine, sexual relationships, the status of one's gender in 
relation to others, as well as definitions of marriage and family. The course 
offers descriptive, comparative and critical analyses of the teachings of 
individual theorists (religious, cultural, and/or philosophical) in order to 
better understand how religious and cultural perspectives bear on the 
questions and controversies about human relationships in the modern 
world. 3 credits. 

RLST 260. CATHOLIC SYMBOLS&SACRAMENT 

This course will be an exploration into the richness and complexity of 
Catholic ideas and experience. We will examine elements of the tradition’s 
religious practice, including symbols, rituals, narratives and community. 
Using a variety of approaches (historical, theological, literary, and cultural), 
we will address critical questions about Catholic life. 3 credits. 

RLST 265. AMERICAN RELIGION 

A survey of religious beliefs and practices in an American context. This 
course examines various expressions of American religiosity and aims to 
contextualize, understand, and analyze the variety and plurality of the 
American religious landscape. 3 credits. 

RLST 266. GLOBALIZED RELIGION 

This course provides a basic introduction to the descriptive and explanatory 
models in the sociological study of religion that prove helpful in examining 
the enculturation of diverse traditions such as Buddhism, Islam, Hinduism, 
and Sikhism into the U.S. religious landscape. In addition, this course 
examines strains of anti-immigration in the United States that resist such 
efforts of religious enculturation. Finally, this course acknowledges the 
distinctiveness of these enculturated religious traditions in order to move 
toward a pluralistic engagement of religious traditions. 3 credits. 

RLST 270. WOMEN & SCRIPTURE 

An exploration of the biblical texts dealing with the themes relating to 
women: their presence and neglect, images, and roles. The course will study 
the contributions, challenges and significance of women in Scripture with 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 234 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


particular concern for contemporary interpretations by Jewish and Christian 
women. 3 credits. 

RLST 275. LIBERATION RELIG & SOCIETY 

This course examines the origin and growth of liberation theologies in Asia, 
Africa, Latin America and the United States. Students will be introduced to 
the work of major liberation theologians and the diverse contexts in which 
liberation theologies are done. The critical roles they play within diverse 
religious, cultural and societal contexts and the impact of economic 
globalization has upon them will also be considered. 3 credits. 

RLST 280. PROPHETIC TRADITIONS 

While our primary focus will be an examination of the prophetic worldviews 
found in Jewish and Christian Scriptures, we will continue our exploration 
into post-biblical texts that reconfigure these biblical prophetic traditions. 
Issues of authority, social justice, exclusivity and violence will be explored. 3 
credits. 

RLST 295. RELIGION, SCIENCE, & MAGIC 

This course examines the complex historical relationship between the fields 
of scientific and religious enquiry. This course approaches these issues 
historically and thematically using case studies to understand and to 
analyze distinctive modes of inquiry about truth claims. 3 credits. 

RLST 305. DEATH & DYING 

Issues surrounding death and dying are both deeply personal and central to 
the human experience. This course is designed to explore ideological 
frameworks around death and relate them to concrete issues. The course is 
designed in two parts. The first part engages ideas found across the globe 
related to death and dying. The second part of the course examine practical 
and ethical considerations. 3 credits. 

RLST 310. EVOLVING RELIGION 

An analysis of the intellectual challenges to religious belief since the 
Enlightenment to the present day with a special emphasis on postmodern 
philosophy and the theological responses to the postmodern critique. 3 
credits. 

RLST 315. WISDOM LITERATURE 

This course examines the diverse wisdom traditions found in Jewish and 
Christian sacred texts. The concern to teach communities and individuals 
how to live a life of righteousness with God’s creation unifies these diverse 
traditions. In addition to examining the development of various wisdom 
ideologies, we will investigate wisdom’s relationship to apocalyptic thought 
in the Hellenistic era. Critical reflection on the blending of these worldviews 
will lead us to a discussion about the ethics of reading within faith 
communities. 3 credits. 

RLST 345. PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION 

This course investigates various issues and arguments within philosophy of 
religion, including: the problem of evil, arguments for God’s existence, the 
concept of religious experience, divine omniscience and omnipotence, 
religious language, miracles, life after death, and the justification of 
religious belief. 3 credits. 

RLST 375. RELIGION & ENVIRONMENT 

An examination of key texts, historical movements, and ideas pertaining to 
the relationship between “religion” and “the environment.” Several 
religious traditions are considered, including: Judaism, Christianity, Islam, 
Buddhism, and Native American religions. 3 credits. 

RLST 385. POETRY OF THE SACRED 

A study of poetry as an expression of and a vehicle for awakening in the 
world’s religious and spiritual traditions. Exploring notions of the sacred and 
theological anthropology, this course examines the context, content, and 
goals of poetry self-reflexively located in faith and spiritual traditions. 
Poetry of Hindu bhakti traditions, Sufism, Zen and Christian mysticism will 
be central, though not exclusive, to this course. 3 credits. 

RLST 390. APOCALYPSE TO ZOMBIE 

Stories about “the end” have been employed by various cultures as a means 
to use language to reflect upon, critique, and explain current events. This 
course compares different visions of the end by investigating the diverse 
ancient and contemporary cultural contexts out of which these imagined 
endings emerge. 3 credits. 

RLST 405. SOCIAL ETHICS 

Social ethics provides an introduction to influential ethical frameworks in 
order to move toward personal ethical engagements with a variety of social 
issues. As a senior capstone course, students engage and apply 
multidisciplinary perspectives on social realities and ethical arguments for 
the development of well-reasoned ethical perspectives. 3 credits. 

RLST 420. MYSTICISM 

A study of the significance of mystical experience in the world’s religions. 
What is the meaning of particularly vivid, intense religious experiences 
reported by sages, saints and seers in the faith traditions of the world? This 
course will examine classic analyses of mysticism, the nature, context and 
conditions of mystical experience, the “perennial philosophy,” the scope of 
ineffability, and the cognitive merit of mystical experience. 3 credits. 

RLST 440. PEACE AND JUSTICE 

In the face of oppression, people of faith and people of good will have 
argued for a principled world of peace and justice for all. This course 
examines how it is that oppressed people and groups have grounded the 
pursuit of peace and justice in terms of social and spiritual liberation. This 
course will explore global and domestic cases of oppression, which may 
include: imperialism and exile, racism and civil rights, sexism and 
homophobia. Diverse religious responses to oppression may include: Jewish, 
Christian, Islamic, Buddhist, and Hindu views. 3 credits. 

RLST 480. SEMINAR RELIGIOUS STUDIES 

A seminar that offers in-depth study of significant religious themes and 
thinkers, determined by the professor. The course is directed to majors and 
minors as their capstone course and does not otherwise meet general core-
curriculum requirements. The course therefore presumes background 
training in religious studies and emphasizes independent, creative 
scholarship and experiential learning. 3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 235 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


RLST 490. SENIOR THESIS 

A student may elect to use three to six credits as “thesis credits” in place of 
one or two courses. This entails writing a substantial research paper and can 
only be done if approved by the student’s advisor and department director. 
3-6 credits. 

ROTC 101. INTRODUCTION TO THE ARMY AND CRITICAL THINKING 

This course introduces students to the personal challenges and 
competencies that are critical for effective leadership and commucation. 
Students will learn how the personal development of life skills such as 
critical thinking, goal setting, time management, physical fitness, and stress 
management relate to leadership, officership, and the Army profession. The 
focus is on developing basic knowledge and comprehension of Army 
leadership dimensions, while gaining an understanding of the ROTC 
program, its purpose in the Army, and its advantages for the student. 3 
credits. 

ROTC 102. INTRODUCTION TO THE PROFESSION OF ARMS 

This course introduces students to the professional challenges and 
competencies that are needed for effective execution of the profession of 
arms and Army communication. Students will learn how Army ethics and 
values shape the Army and the specific ways that these ethics are inculcated 
into Army culture. The focus is on leadership fundamentals such as problem 
solving, listening, presenting briefs, and using effective writing skills. 
Students explore dimensions of leadership attributes and core leader 
competencies in the context of practical, hands-on and interactive exercises. 
3 credits. 

ROTC 201. LEADERSHIP AND DECISION MAKING 

This course introduces students to the principles, theories, methods and 
practices of effective leadership. Students will learn problem solving, 
military operations and personal development in order to adequately 
prepare them to become a successful future officer. The focus of this class is 
for students to demonstrate critical and creative thinking, the ability to 
apply troop leading procedures, comprehension of the officer‘s role in 
leading, and the abillity to apply innovative solutions to problems in concert 
with the principles of mission command. 3 credits. 

ROTC 202. ARMY DOCTRINE AND TEAM DEVELOPMENT 

This course introduces students to the fundamentals of the Leadership, 
Officer Skills, Army Values and Ethics, Personal Development, and Tactics at 
the small unit level. Students will examines the challenges of leading 
tactical teams in the complex contemporary operating environment. The 
course highlights dimensions of terrain analysis, patrolling and operation 
orders. Students develop greater self awareness as they assess their own 
leadership styles and practice communication and team building skills. 3 
credits. 

ROTC 301. TRAINING MANAGEMENT AND THE WARFIGHTING 
FUNCTIONS 

This course challenges Cadets to study, practice and evaluate adaptive 
leadership skills as they are presented with challenging scenarios related to 
squad tactical operations. Cadets receive systematic and specific feedback 
on their leadership attributes and actions. Based on such feedback, as well 

as their own self-evaluations, Cadets continue to develop their leadership 
and critical thinking abilities. The focus is developing Cadet’s tactical 
leadership abilities to enable them to succeed at ROTC’s summer Cadet 
Leadership Course (CLC) at Fort Knox, Kentucky. 3 credits. 

ROTC 302. APPLIED LEADERSHIP IN SMALL UNIT OPERATIONS 

This course uses increasingly intense situations while applying team 
leadership challenges to build Cadet awareness and skills in leading tactical 
operations at the small unit level. Cadets review aspects of full spectrum 
operations. They also conduct military briefings and develop proficiency in 
the operation orders process. The focus is on exploring, evaluating, and 
developing skills in decision making, persuading and motivating team 
members in the contemporary operation environment (COE). MSL 302 
Cadets are evaluated on what they know and do as leaders as they prepare 
for ROTC’s summer Cadet Leadership Course (CLC) at Fort Knox, Kentucky. 3 
credits. 

ROTC 401. THE ARMY OFFICER 

This course transitions the focus of student learning from being trained, 
mentored andevaluated as an MSL III Cadet to learning how to train, mentor 
and evaluate underclass Cadets. MSL IV Cadets will learn the duties and 
responsibilities of an Army staff officer and apply the Military Decision 
Making Process, Army writing style and the Army’s principles of training and 
training management cycle during weekly training meetings to plan, 
execute and assess battalion training events. 3 credits. 

ROTC 402. COMPANY GRADE LEADERSHIP 

This course explores the dynamics of leading in complex situations of current 
military operations in unified land operations. Cadets examine Army ethics 
and values, differences in customs and courtesies, cultural awareness, 
military law, and the impact of the Army’s eight interrelated operational 
variables (PMESII-PT: Political, Military, Economic, Social, Information, 
Infrastructure, Physical Environment, Time) in the face of international 
terrorism, aspects of interacting with non-government organizations, 
civilians on the battlefield, and host nation support. It uses case studies, 
scenarios, and “What Now, Lieutenant?” exercises to prepare Cadets to face 
the complex ethical and practical demands of leading as commissioned 
officers in the United States Army. 3 credits. 

RUSS 101. INTRO TO RUSSIAN I 

An introduction to the Russian language, including development of the 
basic skills: listening, speaking, reading and writing. Learning activities 
aimed toward a flexible command of the language are included. 3 credits. 

RUSS 102. INTRO TO RUSSIAN II 

Further study of the skills introduced in Russian I, including study of 
grammar and aural-oral practice designed to reinforce the basic language 
skills. Prerequisite: RUSS 101 or equivalent. 3 credits. 

RUSS 125. RUSSIAN CULTURE 

Historical and cultural development of Russia are studied. Lectures, class 
discussions, and reports on the most significant aspects and trends of 
political, literary, economic, social and artistic life are included. Course 
conducted in English. 3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 236 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


RUSS 130. GOLDEN AGE OF RUSSIAN LIT 

Study of the major works and writers of the first half of the 19th century. 
Includes Gogol and Lermontov as well as Pushkin and Turgenev. Particular 
emphasis on the growth of Russian realism in light of the Slavophile-
Westernizer debates of this era. Conducted in English. 3 credits. 

RUSS 131. LATER 19TH CEN RUSSIAN LIT 

Includes works of Tolstoy to Chekhov and treats such masterpieces as Anna 
Karenina, Brothers Karamazov and several famous Chekhov plays. Conducted 
in English. 3 credits. 

RUSS 132. MASTERPIECES OF 20TH CENTURY RUSSIAN LITERATURE 

Students will explore the masterpieces of 20th century Russian literature. 
Lectures and course discussions will consider historical background, literary 
movements (Symbolism, Futurism, Acmeism) and aesthetic trends 
(Modernism, Socialist Realism, and Post-Modernism) in analysis of the 
literary works. Conducted in English. 3 credits. 

RUSS 135. TOPICS RUSSIAN LITERATURE/CULTURE 

The content of this course, determined by the instructor, will focus on some 
literary or cultural subject relating to Russia. Coursework will further 
student understanding of Russia and the Russian people. Conducted in 
English. 3 credits. 

RUSS 203. INTERMEDIATE RUSSIAN I 

A study of the more sophisticated grammatical patterns and idiomatic 
structures of Russian designed to increase proficiency in reading and writing 
the language. Increase speaking practice enables the student to become 
more orally proficient in the Russian language. Prerequisite: RUSS 102. 3 
credits. 

RUSS 204. INTERMEDIATE RUSSIAN II 

The continuation of RUSS 203 with study of the four skills, reading, writing, 
listening and speaking. Prerequisite: RUSS 203. 3 credits. 

RUSS 208. CONTEMP READING IN RUSSIAN 

Based on short stories, newspaper articles and excerpts from longer works, 
the course aims to develop vocabulary, reading comprehension, a sense of 
style, and greater facility in discussion. Prerequisite: RUSS 204. 3 credits. 

RUSS 210. CONV/COMP I 

Students will develop their communicative skills, while building vocabulary 
and a greater understanding of structure and idioms, through composition 
and guided as well as spontaneous conversations. Prerequisite: RUSS 208. 3 
credits. 

RUSS 300. RUSSIAN CONV/COMP II 

Students will develop more sophisticated composition and conversation 
skills, such as techniques for persuasion, debating, analysis and creative 
expression. Prerequisite: RUSS 210. 3 credits. 

RUSS 310. SEMINAR: COMP/TRANSLATION 

Examination of several basic differences in the structure of the Russian and 
English languages. Exercises to develop expertise precede directed and free 
composition, problems of translation. Prerequisite: RUSS 300. 3 credits. 

RUSS 316. ABROAD EXPERIENCE 

With instructor approval, students may use this course to develop an 
independent study program based on their experiences abroad. Students 
must have spent at least four weeks abroad and must arrange, prior to 
departure, to complete a research or creative project and present it publicly 
in the semester following their return. Prerequisite: RUSS 204. 3 credits. 

RUSS 350. HIST&DEV RUSS ORTHO CHURCH 

This course will examine the history, dogmatic teachings, and liturgical 
practices of the Russian Orthodox Church as it developed in Russia and will 
address the role of the Church at the present time and predict its role for the 
future. Prerequisite: RUSS 208. 3 credits. 

RUSS 490. SENIOR THESIS 

An experience in original research leading to the development of a 
publishable paper. Topics will be chosen from research sources in 
contemporary Russian works. 3 credits. 

SBM 100. INTRO TO SPORT INDUSTRY 

Sport has grown and spread throughout the world and has developed into a 
complex, extensive and highly distinct structure and organizational process. 
This course will explore the many components of Sport Business 
Management that are present in this academic field. This class will bridge 
these two areas together in such a way that the student will understand 
clearly what the Sport Business Industry is all about. Sport Business is far 
more than people liking sport. 3 credits. 

SBM 150. INTERCOLLEGIATE PRACTICUM 

Practicum is a faculty supervised experience that encompasses aspects of 
NCAA Intercollegiate Athletics at Mercyhurst. The supervising faculty 
member and a member of Mercyhurst Intercollegiate Athletics will construct 
an experience designed to meet the needs of the student as it applies to 
intercollegiate athletics. Prerequisite: SBM 100. 1 credit. 

SBM 210. LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES IN SPORT 

The course provides practitioners the tools necessary to survive in the legal 
and ethical framework of the sport industry. Sport managers will establish a 
foundation of the legal aspects ranging from risk management, gender 
equity, and antitrust law. Basic concepts of ethics and morality will be 
discussed to assist in developing an ethical perspective of sport managers. 3 
credits. 

SBM 220. SPORT MARKETING 

This course applies basic marketing principles to the sport industry. An 
examination of the current environment of the sport industry will include: 
tactics, strategies and examples of sport industry organizations use of 
marketing. Prerequisite: SBM 100. 3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 237 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


SBM 230. SPECIAL TOPICS I 

This course will focus on special topics relevant to Sport Business 
professionals and innovative topics within the field of Sport Business 
Management. Topics may include, but are not limited to, intercollegiate 
athletics, youth sports and sport entrepreneurship. Prerequisite: SBM 100. 3 
credits. 

SBM 310. FACILITY AND EVENT MANAGEMENT 

This course combines the skills and techniques necessary to operate a facility 
with the ability to incorporate the same concepts into a specific event. 
Topics will include management theory specific for the sport industry, 
facility and staff preparation, game management, and sport-related events 
either as a contest or within the event. Prerequisite: SBM 100, MGMT 120. 3 
credits. 

SBM 330. SPECIAL TOPICS II 

This course will focus on special topics relevant to Sport Business 
professionals and innovative topics within the field of Sport Business 
Management. Topics may include, but are not limited to, research, 
analytics, and sport communications. Prerequisite: SBM 100. 3 credits. 

SBM 410. SPORT IN SOCIETY 

A comprehensive overview of the issues impacting sport throughout history 
and its impact on society. The status of acceptance of who can play will help 
students develop a sensitivity to, and understanding of, the role of 
individuals and organizations based on gender, race and ability. 
Prerequisite: Junior standing, SBM 100. 3 credits. 

SBM 420. SPORT GOVERNANCE 

This course will explore many governance structures from the amateur, high 
school, local and professional arenas. Students will examine the major 
sporting government organizations such as the International Olympic 
Committee, National Collegiate Athletic Association, NFL, NHL, NBA and 
MLB. The focus will be on the structures, rules, issues, and regulations that 
govern sport organizations. Prerequisite: Junior standing, SBM 100, MGMT 

120. 3 credits. 
SBM 430. SPORT BUSINESS MANAGEMENT INTERNSHIP 

An individual work/study experience in an approved sport business 
institution. Placement of a qualified student in a sport business setting 
which involves an area of interest, provides training and on-the-job 
learning, and prepares the student for sport business practice. Junior 
standing, 2.75 GPA in required business courses, and written permission of 
the program director or associate dean. 3 credits. 

SCI 100. ENVIRON PROBLEM SOLVING 

A course designed for students considering a science major or interested in 
environmental issues, providing a survey of topics in environmental science 
including the ecosystem concept, risks and economics of pollution, and 
specific environmental pollution, air pollution, toxic wastes, pesticides and 
energy resources. Corequisite: ENVS 101. 3 credits. 

SCI 101. ENVIRON PROBLEM SOLV LAB 

Basic field and laboratory investigation into environmental problems of local 
concern, providing an introduction to the scientific method and the 
techniques used by biologists, geologists, and chemists in environmental 
investigations. Corequisite: ENVS 100. 1 credit. 

SCI 104. METEOROLOGY 

A study of the physical properties of the atmosphere and its changes. 
Observation, prediction, and the study of the causes of the constantly 
changing atmosphere. 4 credits. 

SCI 118. ASTRONOMY 

An introduction to the study of astronomy and cosmology. Topics include: 
the evolution of stars and galaxies; the origin and evolution of the universe; 
dark matter and dark energy; special and general relativity; recent 
discoveries in astronomy and cosmology. Corequisite: EASP 119. 3 credits. 

SCI 119. ASTRONOMY LAB 

Laboratory experience to accompany EASP 118. Observations through the 
Mercyhurst Baltus Observatory. Corequisite: EASP 118. 1 credit. 

SCI 120. PRESIDENTIAL PHYSICS & LAB 

This course is designed for future world leaders in any arena, from business 
to politics, and most importantly for anyone who wants to be informed 
about the science behind the important decisions facing our world leaders. 
This course focuses on quantitative and scientific reasoning, critical analysis, 
and technical writing without the need for a math prerequisite as it covers 
real-world content such as: energy sources; nuclear technologies including 
energy and weaponry; fission, fusion and radioactivity; global climate 
phenomenon such as tsunamis, earthquakes and weather patterns; space 
travel and exploration; satellites, infrared radiation and remote sensing 
capabilities; and the science behind new technological advances. 4 credits. 

SCI 170. ENERGY SCIENCE & LAB 

A survey of the significant chemical and physical concepts related to energy 
usage. An initial introduction to energy mechanics and the laws of 
thermodynamics, applied to “real-world” situations, will be given. Present 
modes of energy generation and usage will be discussd and related to 
environmental considerations. Significant time will be spent with an 
assessment of energy sources. These include: fossil fuels, solar, nuclear, 
geothermal and biomass sources. This course includes a lab component. 4 
credits. 

SOC 100. INTRO TO SOCIOLOGY 

This course introduces students to the discipline of sociology—the scientific 
study of human behavior as shaped by collective forces and self-reflections. 
The primary aim of this course is to enhance students' ability to interpret 
and evaluate the social and cultural influences around us. To achieve this 
aim, the course compares and contrasts sociological theoretical paradigms, 
as well as discusses the strengths and weaknesses of the qualitative and 
quantitative research methodologies. 3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 238 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


SOC 101. CONTEMPORARY SOCIAL PROB 

This course is designed to provide a context for students to critically explore 
selected social conditions that have been determined to constitute social 
problems in contemporary society. Each of the issues selected will be looked 
at from different perspectives using the lens of various theories. The 
contributions of opposing ideologies and ideas, and a critique of research 
related to the phenomena will be utilized to facilitate an understanding of 
the complexity of the phenomena and clarify one’s individual perspective. 3 
credits. 

SOC 102. FAMILY IN CHANGING SOCIETY 

This course looks at the historical family development, cultural family 
patterns, disintegration and reintegration of contemporary family life and 
marital interaction. It will look at the changing attitudes toward marriage 
and the family. 3 credits. 

SOC 107. INTRO TO GERONTOLOGY 

This course is an introduction to the study of aging through the examination 
of the fundamental age associated changes in physical, mental and 
psychological function. Reciprocal relationships between aging groups and 
social institutions will be explored. 3 credits. 

SOC 108. HUMAN GROWTH & DEVELOPMENT 

This course will familarize students with concepts and principles of 
development pertaining to physical, cognitive, emotional and social 
development across the lifespan. The course discusses how the multiple 
domains of development interact with contextual factors to influence 
developmental outcomes and individual differences from birth to late 
adulthood. 3 credits. 

SOC 125. INTRO TO GENDER STUDIES 

This interdisciplinary course will cover the theoretical foundations and 
history of the gender discourse, and address topics central to the discipline 
of gender studies. The economic, political, ideological and social forces that 
shape the cultural construction of gender will be discussed and the 
consequences examined. The discussion will also include the intersection of 
gender, race and socioeconomic class, biology and gender, and the 
gendered body. Through a variety of exercises/discussions and works of 
fiction, attention will be given to the connection between gender issues and 
life experiences. Students will also engage with course topics via lectures, 
readings and films. 3 credits. 

SOC 140. SPECIAL TOPICS 

This course will cover a special topic within the field of sociology. Examples 
include: sociology of food, sociology of film and others. 1-3 credits. 

SOC 203. DEVIANT BEHAVIOR 

A psychological and sociological examination of pathological behavior. 
Deviancy will be discussed as a problem in both individual adjustment and 
in social organization. 3 credits. 

SOC 204. DIVERSITY IN SOCIETY 

This course is designed to provide students with a knowledge base 
concerning human diversity from a sociological perspective. Diversity is 

broadly defined to encompass many aspects of social life, including gender 
and sexuality, social class, race and ethnicity, and (dis)ability. Students will 
learn how to use each of these concepts in conversation and in writing, and 
to view them in combination using an intersectional lens. Phenomena such 
as stereotypes, prejudice and discrimination will be important components 
of course discussion and materials. 3 credits. 

SOC 205. INTRO JUV JUST&DELINQ 

This is the basic course which provides an overview of the juvenile justice 
system and the study of juvenile delinquency. Research and theory are used 
to help the student distinguish between typical forms of adolescent 
exploration and indications of potentially serious delinquency. A variety of 
sociological and social psychological theories of delinquency are reviewed. 3 
credits. 

SOC 208. POWER, ID, RELATIONSHIPS, CULTURE: SOCIOLOGY OF FOOD 

This course explores the cultural and social meaning of food. A central focus 
of sociology is to investigate the inter-relationship between human 
relationships and the environment. Given that food is an element in 
humans’ environment this course will allow students to discover that food 
has meaning that goes beyond its nutritional value. 3 credits. 

SOC 214. GRIEF & LOSS 

This course explores the complex process of grieving as a result of loss. While 
a large focus will be on death and dying, other losses such as divorce, job 
loss and loss of physical health will be discussed. Cultural variations and 
common rituals will be addressed. 3 credits. 

SOC 220. DRUGS,CRIME & CRIM JUSTICE 

This course provides the student with an understanding of drug abuse, 
crime and the criminal justice system. The primary focus is on how police, 
courts and corrections systems respond to drug related crimes and drug-
abusing offenders. The course reviews the history of the drug-crime 
connection, compares criminal justice policies on drug abuse, critiques 
intervention strategies and considers future initiatives to reduce the drug 
problem. 3 credits. 

SOC 228. TREATMENT ADOL BEHAV PROB 

This course focuses on the latest research-based approaches to the 
rehabilitation of adolescents who are either involved in delinquent behavior 
or at risk of involvement. It emphasizes cognitive, cognitive-behavioral, 
familial and multi-systemic approaches. 3 credits. 

SOC 230. CRIMINOLOGY 

An in depth analysis of criminal behavior systems, theoretical developments 
in explaining crime and research methodology used in modern American 
criminology. 3 credits. 

SOC 235. GENDERED RELATIONSHIPS 

This course will examine the continuous cycle of influence between gender 
and relationships. Gender differences within social behavior and experiences 
will be identified. The distinction between gender and sex will be studied in 
terms of identity and communication styles. The intersections and 
interactions between gender, race and class will be developed. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 239 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


Relationships within families and friendships will be the primary focus of the 
course. 3 credits. 

SOC 240. VICTIMOLOGY* 

This course focuses upon a recent and rapidly developing branch of 
criminology which is designed to study the crime victim. Included will be 
victim vulnerability (the susceptibility of certain groups of people to 
victimization) and culpability (the actions on the part of individuals which, 
under certain circumstances, suggest victims may be partly responsible for 
their own victimization). Recently enacted laws pertaining to the rights of 
victims will be examined. 3 credits. 

SOC 241. AGING:ISSUES & CONTROVERSY 

An introduction to the study of aging through the examination of major 
problematical areas of later life in the United States, e.g. retirement, sex and 
institutionalization. Countering viewpoints will be examined. 3 credits. 

SOC 275. COUNSELING THE OLDER ADULT 

This course will identify various areas impacting the lives of the young old, 
middle old and old old. The course will focus on assessment, counseling 
interventions and techniques geared to enriching the world of mature 
adults and their families. 3 credits. 

SOC 300. SOC RESEARCH METHODS 

This course is focused on learning the basics of conducting social science 
research as well as critiquing and utlizing existing research. Students are 
exposed to key aspects of the research process including: choosing a 
research topic; identifying the population of interest; conducting a literature 
review; selecting a research design; collecting data; and descriptive analysis. 
3 credits. 

SOC 301. CONT SOCIOLOGICAL THEORY 

This course aims to familiarize students with contemporary sociological 
theories and how they build upon classical theorists such as Marx, Weber 
and Durkheim. Examples of contemporary theories covered include works 
from Giddens, Bourdieu, Smith, Hooks, Goffman, Foucault and others. 3 
credits. 

SOC 306. SEM:ORG&WHITE COLLAR CRIME* 

This course will examine corporate, occupational, professional and 
organized crime, the biggest growth area of crime and law enforcement 
activity today. Through analysis of cases, recent legal developments and 
literature, emerging trends in the criminal justice system’s reaction to these 
types of crime will be explored. 3 credits. 

SOC 312. SVCS & RESOURCES FOR AGED 

An in-depth inquiry into the community and institutional service systems 
available to elderly Americans through public and/or private funding. 
Representative services will be examined in policy, legislative and 
administrative perspective. 3 credits. 

SOC 337. SOCIOLOGY OF LAW* 

An exploration of the purposes and process of criminal and civil law in the 

U.S. with emphasis on the actual operation of the legal system. Topics 
covered include the police, types of courts, the legal professions, corrections 
and the role of law in social change. 3 credits. 

SOC 338. SOCIOLOGY OF EVIL 

The course examines the social dynamics and interpersonal processes that 
promote dehumanization, denigration and demonization of humans and 
result in mass killings, torture, enslavement and human trafficking. As a 
seminar, students will discuss readings, critique perspectives, and assess 
sociological and social-psychological research. 3 credits. 

SOC 340. SPECIAL TOPICS 

When offered, this course will focus on a special topic within the field of 
sociology. Examples include: Sociology of Mental Health & Aging. 3 credits. 

SOC 342. HUMAN NEEDS&GLOBAL PROB 

This course explores socio-cultural factors that connect human needs to 
global issues. Using a sustainable development paradigm, students will 
develop an understanding of the linkage between global problems such as 
overpopulation, food production/distribution disparities and environmental 
disasters with human/societal needs such as poverty, race and ethnicity, 
gender, sexual orientation, aging, education, health and medicine, drug use, 
and war and terrorism. This course will introduce the perspectives and 
competencies required to prepare for citizenship in the global community of 
the 21st century. 3 credits. 

SOC 350. ANTECEDENTS OF AGGRESSION 

The course explores the origins and development of human aggressive 
behavior with an eye towards its control and treatment. Classical 
formulations of the issue by Thomas Hobbes and Jean-Jacques Rousseau are 
presented as well as contemporary psychological, sociological and 
criminological formulations. Students are exposed to issues in the 
philosophy of social science, e.g. reductionism and changing views of 
causality. The course also examines the origins of nonaggression and how 
aggression might be managed in a complex multicultural society. 3 credits. 

SOC 352. SEM: POLI CRIME & TERROR 

This course will examine political crimes committed for ideological 
purposes, both against the state and by the state. Included are activities 
such as secret police, human rights violations, genocide, crimes of officials of 
government, and illegal surveillance and experiments. In addition, crimes of 
protest, espionage, political whistle-blowing and, in particular, terrorism 
will be explored. 3 credits. 

SOC 475. SOCIOLOGY INTERNSHIP 

The internship affords the student an opportunity to operationalize 
sociology concepts in a variety of work environments. The educational 
experience is administered by the Career Development Center. 3 credits. 

SOC 476. SOCIOLOGY INTERNSHIP 

The internship affords the student an opportunity to operationalize 
sociology concepts in a variety of work environments. The educational 
experience is administered by the Career Development Center. 6 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 240 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


SOC 482. INDEPENDENT STUDY 

This course is for students interested in exploring a specialized topic in the 
field. 1-3 credits. 

SOC 490. SENIOR PROJECT 

Students can complete the sociology degree requirements by completing a 
research thesis which includes developing, implementing and successfully 
writing about an original research project. Oversight is provided by a faculty 
member from Sociology, Social Work or Criminal Justice. 3 credits. 

SOCW 107. INTRO TO SOCIAL WORK 

Explores the nature of the social work profession including its history and 
value base. This course will familiarize the student with the direction of 
social work for the future beginning practitioner. Students have the 
opportunity to gain an understanding of the various social service agencies 
and populations served by social workers. 3 credits. 

SOCW 220. HUMAN BEH & SOC ENVIRON I 

This course explores the interactions within and among human biological, 
psychological, sociological and cultural systems as they affect human 
growth and development. Systems theory provides the primary lens from 
which to understand the complex dynamics involved in human behavior. 
Students also explore and critique traditional and alternative paradigms 
that help understand human behavior. Throughout the course emphasis is 
placed on human diversity. 3 credits. 

SOCW 221. HUMAN BEH & SOC ENVIRON II 

This course is a continuation of HBSE I. Emphasis will be on assessment with 
particular attention to HIV/AIDS, substance abuse, mental health, gender, 
grief and loss, and aging. 3 credits. 

SOCW 237. HUMAN SERVICES & CHILDREN 

The course will focus on human services provided to children. Topics include: 
how to complete foster and adoptive home studies; placement preparation 
for foster and adoptive homes; assessment and treatment of emotional, 
physical and sexual abuse of children. Students will explore a variety of 
theoretical models of treating children with behavioral problems. 3 credits. 

SOCW 304. SOCIAL WELFARE ANALYSIS 

This course aims to assist the students in critically assessing the provision of 
human services in the U.S. today and the local community specifically. 
Students determine ways that the system of services can be improved. In 
order to do this, in addition to readings, class lecture and discussion, 
students participate in site visits to a variety of human service agencies. 
They are also introduced to perinent community initiatives. 3 credits. 

SOCW 307. SOCIAL WORK PRACTICE I 

This is the first of three courses in the social work practice sequence. Using 
the generalist, problem-solving framework, it is designed to teach social 
work students the concepts and skills to use in a variety of settings and 
situations. The use of case discussions and role-playing will enhance the 
learning of these skills. 3 credits. 

SOCW 313. CRISIS INTER SKILL CJ&SOCW 

This course is designed to enable students to develop effective crisis 
intervention strategies. The theories and skills taught prepare students to 
deal with crises they will face in their careers. Students will learn to identify 
potential crises, deescalate 
situations and provide appropriate crisis 
interventions in a variety of situations. Sophomore status or above. 3 credits. 

SOCW 330. SOCIAL WORK PRACTICE II 

This course is a continuation of Social Work Practice I and is designed to 
further develop the interpersonal skills needed in the social work profession. 
The methods and techniques used are designed to prepare students for 
working in a variety of social service settings. The course will include case 
discussions, role-playing, recorded interviewing and evaluation. 
Prerequisite: SOCW 307. 3 credits. 

SOCW 340. LEADERSHIP DEVELOPMENT THROUGH MENTORING 

This course is designed to introduce students to prevention and intervention 
efforts intended to optimize children and youth’s developmental outcomes. 
Particular emphasis will be directed toward building children’s resiliency 
and decreasing their at-risk factors. Students will develop leadership skills 
as they develop and implement a mentoring program for children in an area 
school. 3 credits. 

SOCW 430. SOC WORK PRACTICE III 

This course builds on the knowledge and skills acquired in SOCW 307 and 
SOCW 330 as it introduces social work majors to theories and concepts 
regarding working with groups, organizations and communities. Within this 
context, students will gain knowledge and self-awareness needed to work 
effectively with large systems, increase their understanding of group 
dynamics, and learn methods of engagement, assessment and intervention 
with the aim of promoting growth, self-determination and justice. 
Prerequisite: SOCW 330. 3 credits. 

SOCW 440. SOC WELFARE POLICY&PROCED 

This course is designed to develop skills in social policy analysis and 
advocacy. Students will assess the relationship between social policy and 
social values. In addition, students will learn strategies and techniques used 
to impact political processes related to the planning and delivery of human 
services. Prerequisite: SOCW 304. 3 credits. 

SOCW 480. SOCIAL WORK SEMINAR 

This course is designed to facilitate the integration of the knowledge and 
skill components for beginning social work practice. The course is taken 
concurrently with the field placement. 3 credits. 

SOCW 485. SOCIAL WORK INTERNSHIP 

The internship provides an opportunity to operationalize concepts learned in 
class and provides the vehicle to help integrate knowledge and skills for the 
beginning social worker. The intense supervision and seminar help the 
student become more aware of one’s role in the helping profession. 6 
credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 241 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


SOCW 486. SOCIAL WORK INTERNSHIP 

The internship provides an opportunity to operationalize concepts learned in 
class and provides the vehicle to help integrate knowledge and skills for the 
beginning social worker. The intense supervision and seminar help the 
student become more aware of one’s role in the helping profession. 9 
credits. 

SOCW 487. SOCIAL WORK INTERNSHIP 

The internship provides an opportunity to operationalize concepts learned in 
class and provides the vehicle to help integrate knowledge and skills for the 
beginning social worker. The intense supervision and seminar help the 
student become more aware of one’s role in the helping profession. 3 
credits. 

SPAN 101. INTRO TO SPANISH I 

An introduction to the Spanish language, including development of the 
basic skills: listening, speaking, reading and writing. Learning activities 
aimed toward developing communicative proficiency. For students with no 
prior language experience. 3 credits. 

SPAN 102. INTRO TO SPANISH II 

Further study of the skills introduced in Introduction to Spanish I, including a 
continuing study of Spanish grammar and aural-oral practice designed to 
reinforce the basic language skills. For students with 1-2 years of prior 
language study. Prerequisite: SPAN 101. 3 credits. 

SPAN 125. LATIN-AMERICAN CULTURE 

Historical and cultural development of Latin America. Lectures, class 
discussions, and readings examine the most significant aspects and trends of 
political, literary, economic, social and artistic life. The course is conducted in 
English. 3 credits. 

SPAN 130. LATIN-AMERICAN LITERATURE 

A study of the major trends in literature from the Pre-Columbian period to 
present day, with emphasis on the authors of the “Boom” and “Post-Boom” 
years. This class is conducted in English. 3 credits. 

SPAN 203. INTERMEDIATE SPANISH I 

A communicative approach to an overview of fundamental grammar 
concepts, including the simple and compound tenses of the indicative and 
subjunctive moods. Deeper understanding of verb tenses and other more 
advanced grammar concepts will allow more sophisticated expression and 
comprehension. For students with 2-3 years of high school Spanish. 
Prerequisite: Span 102 or equivalent. 3 credits. 

SPAN 204. INTERMEDIATE SPANISH II 

An intensive study of the subjunctive mood, as well as some of the more 
sophisticated grammatical patterns and idiomatic structures of Spanish, 
designed to increase proficiency in reading, writing, and speaking the 
language. For students with 4 or more years of prior study. Prerequisite: 
SPAN 203. 3 credits. 

SPAN 208. INTRODUCTION TO LITERATURE 

Using short stories, poems, and novels, students will enhance their reading 
comprehension while discussing literay concepts such as plot, theme, 
metaphor and symbol. Prerequisite: SPAN 204. 3 credits. 

SPAN 209. INTRO SPANISH CIVILIZATION 

This course presents an introduction to the contemporary culture and 
civilization of Spain. Readings, lectures, and other activities introduce 
students to the geography, history and politics of Spain as well as 
contemporary issues such as regionalism, immigration and the European 
Union, which are shaping the culture of modern Spain. Taught in Spanish. 
Prerequisite: SPAN 204. 3 credits. 

SPAN 210. CONVERSATION/COMPOSITION I 

Students will develop their communicative skills, while building vocabulary 
and a greater understanding of structure and idioms, through composition 
and guided as well as spontaneous conversations. Prerequisite: SPAN 204. 3 
credits. 

SPAN 230. SPANISH FOR BUSINESS 

Using Spanish as the language of instruction, this course examines business 
practices in Latin America and Spain in an era of globalization. Students will 
acquire the vocabulary and cultural skills needed to interact in a business 
setting. Memo, resume and business letter writing, as well as the interview 
and telephone skills, will be practiced. Prerequisite: Span 204. 3 credits. 

SPAN 300. CONVERSATION/COMPOSITION II 

This course is designed in sequence with Conversation/Composition I to 
provide further opportunities for creative communication, emphasizing both 
written and oral expression. Pre-requisite SPAN 210. 3 credits. 

SPAN 305. SEMINAR:CULTURE/LITERATURE 

Content determined by preference of students/professor. Focus may be on a 
literary movement, a century, or a genre. Group will then examine the 
relationships between cultural patterns and literary tendencies. 
Prerequisite: SPAN 204. 3 credits. 

SPAN 308. PHONETICS 

This upper level course focuses on the mastery of the International Phonetic 
System, the phonemes and allophones of Spanish/French, phonetic and 
phonemic transcription, dialectical variation, etc. Prerequisite: SPAN 204. 3 
credits. 

SPAN 310. SEMINAR: COMPOSITION/TRANSLATION 

Student will hone their skills in compositoin, writing descriptive, narrative, 
expository and argumentative essays. Students wll examine several basic 
differences in the structure of the Spanish and English languages before 
addressing problems of translation. Prerequisite: Senior standing or 
instructor permission. 3 credits. 

SPAN 316. ABROAD EXPERIENCE 

With instructor approval, students may use this course to develop an 
independent study program based on their experiences abroad. Students 
must have spent at least four weeks in a Spanish-speaking country and must 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 242 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


arrange, prior to the trip, to complete a research or creative project and 
present it during the semester following their return. Prerequisite: SPAN 

204. 3-6 credits. 
SPMD 155. PERSONAL HEALTH SCIENCE 

A multifaceted view of health/wellness including cardiovascular fitness, 
resistance training, flexibility, nutrition, body composition, stress 
management and other contemporary health care issues will be researched 
and discussed. You will demonstrate an understanding of related theory by 
researching, writing, participating in group discussions and debates, 
performing relevant laboratory projects, relating information in exams, 
quizzes and assignments. Ultimately, you will be able to promote a healthier 
lifestyle for yourself and members of the community including the general 
layperson, active individual and the organized athlete. Sports Medicine 
majors only. 3 credits. 

SPMD 157. EMERGENCY ATHL INJURY MGMT 

A lecture and clinical course introducing the students to athletic injuries 
requiring immediate medical intervention. Emergency procedures include: 
respiratory distress, head and cervical neck trauma, circulatory failure and 
heat/cold stress. AT and SPMD majors only or by permission. 3 credits. 

SPMD 161. ASSESSMENT/INJURY MGMT I 

A lecture and lab course introducing the student to the etiology, prevention 
and management of specific athletic injuries to the foot, ankle and knee. 
There will be a strong emphasis on anatomy of bone, muscle and ligament 
at each joint. Hands-on clinical assessment of each joint will be taught and 
the student will be evaluated on their individual psycho motor skills. 
Students are required to complete 30 hours of observation in clinical 
professional sites related to their chosen pre-health field. 3 credits. 

SPMD 162. INTRO TO SPORTSMEDICINE 

The purpose of this course is to introduce first year Sports Medicine students 
to the allied health profession and injury/illness pathophysiology and 
evaluation. History of their desired profession, necessary educational 
background and job opportunities will be discussed in order to promote 
professional development. Students will gain knowledge of the tissue injury 
cycle at the cellular level, which allows the students to have a complete 
understanding of the healing process. The evaluation sequence, along with 
proper documentation will be introduced and students are encouraged to 
apply this knowledge. Throughout the course students will be using and 
focusing on their critical thinking skills in relation to their profession. 3 
credits. 

SPMD 205. EXERCISE ASSESSMENT I 

This course is part of a series of courses that prepare students in the health 
promotion field to work with clients in assessing physical fitness levels and 
individualizing exercise/activity programs that will be beneficial in 
improving the overall health of the general population as well as in the 
treatment of persons with chronic diseases and disabilities. American 
College of Sports Medicine guidelines will be used to present theory 
regarding health screening and risk stratification, pretest clinical evaluation, 
physical fitness testing and interpretation, general principles of exercise 

prescription, methods for changing behavior, and legal issues. Sports 
Medicine majors only. Prerequisite: SPMD 155. 3 credits. 

SPMD 206. EXERCISE ASSESSMENT I LAB 

This course is the laboratory extension of SPMD 205. The purpose of the class 
is to allow the student to gain experience in assessment of a client/athlete 
in the following areas: assess resting and exercise blood pressure, assess 
resting and exerciser heart rate, assess submaximal graded cardiorespiratory 
exercise tests utilizing a variety of equipment, assess anaerobic exercise 
testing utilizing a variety of equipment, assess flexibility utilizing a 
flexometer and goniometer, assess and determine V02 in order to prescribe 
cardiorespiratory exercise, assess upper and lower body muscular strength, 
muscular power, and muscular endurance utilizing a variety of equipment, 
assess client body composition utilizing a variety of equipment. The student 
will be exposed to the utilization of ECG. The student will be able to bring 
classroom theory into practical experience. Corequisite: SPMD 205. 1 credit. 

SPMD 207. ORIENT TO OCC THERAPY 

This course will be the fundamental introduction of the history, roles, skills 
and responsibilities of the occupational therapy profession. Scope of 
practice, client population needs and addressing problem solving skills will 
also be stressed. 3 credits. 

SPMD 210. PRIN HEALTH PROMOTION 

An introductory course to health promotion initiatives. Future job 
opportunities and certifications in the health field, community and school 
health, and worksite health promotion will be major areas of consideration 
in the course. Specific topics, to name a few, will include: designing and 
implementing health promotion programs for diverse populations; 
evaluation of personnel, programs and facilities; ethics associated with the 
health profession; group and one-on-one teaching skills; application of the 
stages of behavior change in health promotion; marketing strategies for 
health promotion; and ACSM facility standards. Prerequisites: SPMD 155 or 
ATR 256. 3 credits. 

SPMD 262. ASSESS/INJURY MGMT II 

A lecture and lab course introducing the student to the etiology, prevention 
and management of specific athletic injuries to the wrist/hand, elbow and 
shoulder. There will be a strong emphasis on anatomy of bone, muscle and 
ligament at each joint. Hands on clinical assessment of each joint will be 
taught and the student will be evaluated on their individual psycho motor 
skills. Prerequisites: SPMD 161, AT/Sports med Majors Only. 3 credits. 

SPMD 263. NUTRITION FOR HEALTH PROF 

The functions and sources of nutrients in maintaining health and 
performance are explored throughout the life cycle. Students will be 
expected to interpret current nutrition information, conduct nutrition 
analyses, and develop counseling techniques necessary to assist clients in 
maintaining and improving general health and performance. Prerequisites: 
CHEM 111, CHEM 112, And, CHEM 113, CHEM 114, Or, CHEM 121, CHEM 122, 
AT/Sportsmed Majors Only. 3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 243 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


SPMD 264. ASSESS/INJURY MGMT III 

A lecture and lab course introducing the student to the etiology, prevention 
and management of specific athletic injuries to the hip, lumbar, thoracic and 
cervical spine. There will be a strong emphasis on anatomy of bone, muscle 
and ligament at each joint. Hands on clinical assessment of each body 
section will be taught and the student will be evaluated on their individual 
psycho motor skills. Prerequisite: SPMD 262. 3 credits. 

SPMD 305. EXERCISE PRESCRIPTION 

A lecture and lab course that expands on the specifics of exercise assessment 
techniques beyond those taught in other courses. Evaluation of special 
populations, including geriatric, pediatric, elite athletic, and chronic disease 
populations will be covered in case study format. Students will focus on 
theories and prinicples of exercise prescription, application of muliple forms 
of exercise assessment, and appropriate interpretation of clinical and 
perfomance data, including graded exercise testing, metabolic 
measurement, and genetic/epigentic profiling. Sports Medicine majors only. 
Corequisite: SPMD 306. 3 credits. 

SPMD 306. EXERCISE PRESCRIPTION LAB 

This lab will focus on the practical applications of topics addressed in lecture 
and clinical proficiency testing will be incorporated. Corequisite: SPMD 305. 
1 credit. 

SPMD 307. APPLICATION OF OCC THERAPY 

This course will emphasize treatment intervention related to occupational 
therapy. Communication skills, assessment skills, infection control, 
development of patient goals and outcomes will be stressed. Field 
experience will be required in the OT clinical environment. Prerequisite: 
SPMD 207. 3 credits. 

SPMD 322. COMMUNITY HEALTH 

This course will explore the concepts of health from the larger community 
and societal perspective. The role of federal, state and local governments in 
community health will be discussed. The leading causes of death in the 
United States will be discussed. Community health priorities and 
environmental health issues will be discussed. Prerequisites: SPMD 155, or 
ATR 256. 3 credits. 

SPMD 360. SPORT/HEALTH FITNESS MGMT 

Study of the administrative procedure in sports health fitness environments 
and techniques for developing effectiveness as an administrator. Practical 
experience in solving hypothetical administrative problems provided. Topics 
include staff hiring, facility design, insurance protocol, budget design, 
medical practice act and employment opportunities including resume 
writing and mock interviews. Sports Medicine majors only. 3 credits. 

SPMD 365. KINESIOLOGY 

A study of the principles of body mechanics, physics and anatomy in relation 
to human movement Special attention will be given to movement specific 
to sports activities and injury prevention. Sports Medicine majors only. 
Prerequisites: SPMD 161, BIO 240, BIO 241, Or, BIO 334, BIO 335, AT/Sports 
Med majors only. Corequisite: SPMD 366. 3 credits. 

SPMD 366. KINESIOLOGY LAB 

Laboratory experience stressing principles of physics and its relationship to 
efficiency of human movement and sports activities. Corequisite: SPMD 365. 
1 credit. 

SPMD 370. STRENGTH TRNG&PROG DESIGN 

This course is designed to help prepare the student to sit for the National 
Strength and Conditioning Association (NSCA) Certified Strength and 
Conditioning Specialist (CSCS) exam. Concepts and applications of exercise 
science, testing and evaluation, exercise techniques and organization are 
some of the topics which will be discussed. Sports Medicine majors. 
Prerequisites: BIO 250, BIO 251, or BIO 344, BIO 345, Sports Medicine majors. 
Corequisite: SPMD 371. 3 credits. 

SPMD 371. STRENGTH TRNG&PROG DES LAB 

This course is designed to allow the students to learn and practice the 
required weight training components of each lift. Power lifts, core lifts, 
strength lifts, accessory lifts, flexibility, medicine ball training are some of 
the training techniques which will be taught. The student will learn how to 
properly spot and instruct strength training techniques. Sports Medicine 
majors. Corequisite: SPMD 370. 1 credit. 

SPMD 372. THERAPEUTIC MGMT/MOD&REHAB 

Classroom and clinical experience stressing the proper use of therapeutic 
modalities and the construction of injury rehabilitation programs related to 
specific injury case studies occurring from sports participation or active 
lifestyles. Prerequisite: SPMD 162. 3 credits. 

SPMD 380. EXERCISE PHYSIOLOGY 

This course describes the physiological, behavioral and biomechanical 
effects of physical exercise. It builds upon the student’s basic background in 
human physiology particularly in the areas of neuromuscular coordination 
and strength, cardiovascular fitness, respiratory and nutritional support, and 
hormonal and ph balance. The consequence of physical conditioning on 
these systems is also emphasized while also discussing the effects human 
factors and environmental factors have on physical performance. 
Corequisite: SPMD 381. 3 credits. 

SPMD 381. EXERCISE PHYSIOLOGY LAB 

Tests to evaluate conditioning and performance in general will be explained 
and tested in the laboratory. During laboratory the student will participate 
in an extensive series of exercises to assess and interpret muscle 
strength/endurance, anaerobic capacities and aerobic capacities. 
Corequisite: SPMD 380. 1 credit. 

SPMD 410. EXERCISE SCIENCE SEMINAR 

This course will serve as the capstone of the Exercise Science major. 
Students will be instructed in how to assess and prescribe exercise for 
special populations. Students will also be given an actual client from the 
Mercyhurst community who they will pre-screen, assess, develop, 
implement and perform a post program evaluation of an exercise program 
for this client. The student will be expected to meet weekly with the client 
throughout the semester outside of class time. Prerequisite: SPMD 380. 3 
credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 244 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


SPMD 450. SPECIAL POPULATIONS 

This course is designed to provide students with the background on 
physiology, pathophysiology and pharmacology in special populations, with 
respect to practice for the Clinical Exercise Physiologist. The rate at which 
chronic diseases and the proportion of the population that is aged are 
significantly increasing and shifting the health and wellness of the nation; 
considerations specific to physiology across the lifespan and the impact of 
individual disease and co-morbidity is relevant to the assessment, diagnosis 
and appropriate treatment of an ever growing proportion of the population. 
3 credits. 

SPMD 460. CARDIAC ASSESSMENT 

This course is designed to provide the student with the background 
necessary to conduce and interpret clinical exercise testing. This will include 
assessment of resting and exercise electrocardiogram (ECG), knowledge of 
when to terminate an exercise test, and how to interpret clinical exercise 
test data. The student will also be able to describe other procedures for 
diagnostic exercise testing (e.g., echocardiography, angiography, nuclear 
stress testing, etc.) This course will follow ACSM testing recommendations 
and guidelines to prepare the student for ACSM examinations. 3 credits. 

SPMD 463. ETHICS ALLIED HEALTH SCI* 

3 credits. 

SPMD 464. MED TERMINOLOGY HLTH SCI 

Medical Terminology pertinent to the practicing allied healthcare clinician 
will be discussed in this course. Specific terminology, eponyms, 
abbreviations, suffix and prefix in relation to the medical conditions and the 
human body will be discussed. HIPPA, record keeping, documentation and 
professional communication will also be covered. Prerequisites: SPMD 162, 
BIO 240, or BIO 334. 2 credits. 

SPMD 470. ADVANCED EXERCISE PRESCRIPTION 

The student will gain experience in prescription of appropriate exercise tests 
and interventions based on assessment of a client/athlete in the following 
areas: maximal and submaximal graded cardiorespiratory exercise tests 
utilizing a variety of equipment and methods, anaerobic exercise testing 
utilizing a variety of equipment , assessment of body composition utilizing a 
variety of equipment. The student will also be exposed to the utilization and 
interpretation of the ECG. Learning how to create an appropriate 
prescription for an individual or a group based on factors such as fitness 
level, clients’ goals, health status, restrictions, and likes and dislikes will be 
covered. 3 credits. 

SPMD 471. ADVANCED EXERCISE PRESCRIPTION LAB 

During this course, the student will be assigned a “client” from the 
Mercyhurst community. The student will be responsible for performing 
exercise testing and prescription using ACSM guidelines discussed in the 
lecture portion of the course. 1 credit. 

SPMD 472. TOPICS IN PHARMACOLOGY 

A course designed to educate the medical health professional on the proper 
use, dosage, physiological effects, and ethical issues related to commonly 

used over-the-counter prescription medicines and alternative supplements. 
Sports Med majors. Prerequisites: SPMD 161. 3 credits. 

SPMD 480. RESEARCH METHODS I 

This course will establish the basis for research in the allied health field. The 
need for continuing research in all four Sports Medicine tracks will be 
discussed. The students will understand the difference between qualitative 
and quantitative research. Experimental and descriptive research methods 
will be introduced and discussed. Students will understand the components 
of the literature review. The students will conduct a literature review and 
develop a research project. Research methodology will be discussed and 
applied to the students’ chosen research project. The students will prepare a 
research proposal to be presented to the Institutional Review Board for 
approval. Junior Sports Medicine/Exercise Science majors. 2 credits. 

SPMD 481. RESEARCH METHODS II 

The students will conclude the year of research methods by initiating their 
research projects after obtaining institutional review board approval. The 
students will begin data collection and analysis. The students will conclude 
their research project in an appropriately written format for completion of a 
Baccalaureate project. Students will also prepare a PowerPoint presentation 
and formulate a poster for presentation purposes. Prerequisite: SPMD 480. 1 
credit. 

SPMD 483. RESEARCH METHODS LAB 

This research lab will allow the students the necessary time, place and 
access to any/all appropriate equipment to conduct their research 
experiments with the assistance of the Sports Medicine faculty. 
Prerequisites: SPMD 480, SPMD 481. 1 credit. 

SPMD 485. EXERCISE SCIENCE PRACTICUM 

Students will critically summarize and evaluate their observation and 
internship experiences in the Exercise Science program. This will take the 
form of a semester project (re: manuscript), culminating in: (1) an applied 
review of the exercise science literature; (2) an evidence-based evaluation of 
facility operations and staff qualifications, knowledge, and client interaction 
at each facility (including operational strengths and weaknesses), and; (3) a 
constructive commentary on future directions and the student's professional 
evolution in the world of applied exercise science. 3 credits. 

SPMD 486. CLINICAL EXER SPEC PREP 

This course will review ACSM outlined competencies defined in the scope of 
practice for the ACSM Clinical Exercise Specialist Exam (CES) to prepare 
students to sit for the CES exam. 1 credit. 

SPMD 487. DEPT DIR CLIN EXER INTERN 

This course will prepare students to sit for the CES exam by completing a 
minimum of 500 hours working with clinical populations. These hours may 
include assisting with cardiac/rehabilitation programs, exercise testing and 
prescription in a clinical population, electrocardiography interpretation, 
patient education and counseling, disease management of cardiac, 
pulmonary and metabolic diseases, and emergency management. 5 credits. 
5 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 245 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


SPMD 370. CORRECTIVE EXERCISE TECHNIQUES 

This course will strengthen the student’s knowledge and application of 
functional anatomy. Students will learn to demonstrate the systematic 
process of identifying a neuromuscular dysfunction, develop a plan of 
action, and implement an integrated corrective strategy. Corequisite: ATR 
256 or SPMD 370. Prerequisite: BIO 250 or BIO 334. 3 credits. 

STAT 109. INTRO TO STATISTICS 

This course is an introduction to the uses of statistics and probability as 
decision and problem solving tools. Topics included are: measures of central 
tendency; variability; probability; counting, binomial distribution; normal 
distribution; confidence intervals correlation and regression; hypothesis 
testing, statistical inference, sampling techniques and experimental design. 
Prerequisite: MATH Placement score of at least 30. 3 credits. 

STAT 130. INTRO TO SOCIAL STATISTICS 

This course introduces students to statistical methodologies and basic 
knowledge on the use of statistics in scientific research. Students use 
quantitative reasoning as they gain an understanding of descriptive and 
inferential statistics, including the interpretation and application of 
quantitative data. 3 credits. 

STAT 137. BIOSTATISTICS 

Whereas epideiology is the science of public health, biostatistics is the 
“toolkit” of the epidemiologist and public health practicitioner with many 
applications across clinical, evaluation and research settings. Public health 
scientists must collect and use data to answer key questions about the 
effectiveness of interventions, monitor the health of populations and make 
decisions based on evidence. Buidling on a foundation of basic statistics, the 
course uses real-world health data and simulations to practice applying the 
same tools used by professional epidemiologists in the field and medical 
researchers investigating the causes of disease. 3 credits. 

STAT 139. STATISTICS FOR THE SCIENCES 

This course is an introduction to statistical methods that are of particular 
interest to biology and natural science majors. We will explore the use of 
statistical methodology in designing, analyzing, interpreting, and 
presenting biological experiments and observations. We will cover 
descriptive statistics, elements of experimental design, probability, 
hypothesis testing and statistical inference, analysis of variance, correlation, 
regression techniques, and non-parametric statistical methods. Throughout 
the course the application of statistical techniques within a natural science 
context will be emphasized, using data from laboratory and field studies. 
Prerequisite: MATH Placement score of at least 46. 3 credits. 

SUST 210. RESPONDING TO CLIMATE CHANGE 

This course engages students in practical activities that model responsible 
actions to address climate change. Introductory lectures will provide an 
overview of the scientific basis of human-induced climate change, the 
history of human response to climate change (in a deep time perspective), 
and the efficacy of modern approaches to mitigation and adaptation. Most 
of the class periods will focus on the processes involved in conducting a 
greenhouse gas inventory and advancing a climate action plan for an 
organization, using Mercyhurst’s programs as the working models. The 

course will include a service component whereby students working in 
groups will help an organization in the community to initiate climate 
change response activities. 3 credits. 

SUST 305. FOUNDATIONS OF SUSTAINABILITY 

Designed for upper level students interested in focusing their studies in the 
area of sustainability, this course will explore the theories, principles and 
strategies concerning the challenge of living more environmentally 
responsibly. This course will explore in depth the issues related to 
sustainable development from different disciplinary perspectives. 3 credits. 

SUST 490. SENIOR FIELD EXPERIENCE IN SUSTAINABILITY 

In this capstone senior experience, the student working with a faculty 
member and in collaborative consultation with a community organization, a 
business, government agency, or on the Mercyhurst campus, engages in a 
substantial and meaningful service project designed to help advance the 
principles of sustainability in the region. 3 credits 

THEA 101. THEATRE APPRECIATION 

An introduction to the live performance experience through the study of the 
various elements of theatre and performance, the history of theatre from 
ancient Greeks to modern times, and dramatic literature. 3 credits. 

THEA 110. ACTING I 

An introduction to the creative process of acting, with a focus on the 
Stanislavski System. Students explore a broad spectrum of skills, including 
imagination, concentration, emotional and sensory awareness, and vocal 
and physical expressiveness. 3 credits. 

THEA 140. SPECIAL TOPICS IN LITERATURE 

This course is designed to expose students to concepts or techniques not 
covered in established theatre courses. Topics for study may include voice 
and movement, playwriting, dramaturgy, stage management, 
improvisation, and study abroad opportunities. This course is repeatable for 
credit under a different topic. 3 credits. 

THEA 210. ACTING II 

An in-depth exploration of the basic principles of acting and the creative 
process introduced in Acting I. Students explore a broad spectrum of skills, 
including imagination, concentration, emotional and sensory awareness, 
and vocal and physical expressiveness. Prerequisite: THEA 110. 3 credits. 

THEA 245. SCRIPT ANALYSIS 

An exploration of dramatic literature with a concentration in play analysis. 3 
credits. 

THEA 290. TOPICS IN THEATRE HISTORY 

A course that explores a theme, period, movement or genre in musical 
theatre history through the reading and discussion of representative plays 
and their production. 3 credits. 

THEA 356. MODERN DRAMA 

Intensive study of major contemporary plays, paying particular attention to 
the theatrical, literary, and cultural contexts of individual works. 3 credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 246 COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 


THEA 358. MODERN AMERICAN DRAMA 

A survey of American drama from Eugene O’Neill to the present, with a focus 
on the theatrical, literary, and cultural contexts of individual works. Live 
performances and films are utilized for students to gain an onstage 
perspective. 3 credits. 

THEA 401. PRACTICUM 

Theatre minors must complete a practicum in conjunction with Mercyhurst 
theatre productions. Opportunities include, but are not limited to: 
dramaturgy, stage management, acting, scenic design, costume design, 
lighting design, property design, construction, and running crew. Students 
should register for the practicum course once. All projects require instructor 
approval and are critically assessed by the supervising faculty member. 3 
credits. 

WL 101. CULT&LINGUISTIC DIVRS LRNR 

This course, which satisfies the Humanities core requirement for Education 
majors, provides the knowledge, skills and dispositions that enable K-12 
teachers to facilitate learning among students from various linguistic and 
cultural backgrounds. Specifically, the course will (1) explore variations in 
personality, educational background, social class, ethnicity, national origin, 
language, and culture; (2) analyze the issues of race, racism, and culture in 
historical and contemporary perspectives; (3) explore strategies for teaching 

multicultural and multilingual English language learners in K-12 settings; 
and (4) identify obstacles to participation in the educational process by 
diverse cultural and ethnic groups. Students will be required to complete 
field. Prerequisite: Education majors. 3 credits. 

WL 312. SECOND LANG ACQUISITION 

This course will present a historical overview of language education and 
introduce the student to various current approaches to foreign language 
teaching, including the Natural Approach, communicative methods, and 
Total Physical Response. Issues such as error correction, grammar 
instruction, testing (including the ACTFL proficiency guidelines), and 
bilingual education/ESL will be discussed. Students will become familiar 
with the use of the language lab and techniques for its implementation. 
Prerequisite: Language education majors. 3 credits. 

WL 314. INTRO TO SOCIOLINGUISTICS 

This course is for upper-level undergraduates with special permission from 
the instructor. It does not assume prior language or linguistics study but 
rather introduces students to the social aspects of language, in general, and 
to the relationship between language and social factors that affect its usage, 
such as geography, gender, ethnicity, age and socioeconomic class. 3 
credits. 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


BOARD OF TRUSTEES 247 
BOARD OF TRUSTEES 


Richard A. Lanzillo ‘83 

Chair of the Board 

Joseph G. NeCastro ‘78 

Vice Chair and Treasurer 

BOARD OF TRUSTEES VOTING 
MEMBERSHIP 

Sister Mary Ann Bader, RSM ‘73 
Terrence W. Cavanaugh 
Sister JoAnne K. Courneen, RSM ‘64 
Mary Ellen Dahlkemper ‘73 
Dausey J. Dausey ‘97 
Rosemary D. Durkin ‘77 
Stephen J. Fiedler ‘85 
Sister Jane Gerety, RSM 
Joanne Hosey-McGurk 
Shannon B. Holley ‘17 
Andrea T. Jeffress 

B. Scott Kern 
Lev J. Kubiak ‘88 
John H. Langer ‘95 
BOARD OF TRUSTEES 

OFFICERS 

Sister JoAnne K. Courneen, RSM ‘64 

Vice Chair 

Rosemary D. Durkin ‘77 

Secretary 

Richard A. Lanzillo ‘83 

Michael T. Victor 
William G. Lewis 

Patrick J. Weschler ‘78 
Brian M. Lilly 

Peter J. Zaphiris 
Robert D. MacKinlay, Jr. ‘99 

Trustee Emeriti (non-voting) 

Yvonne J. Maher ‘93 

A. James Freeman 
Robert Mazza 
Elizabeth M. Greenleaf ‘52 
Desmond J. McDonald 

Myron Jones 
John A. Munch ‘91 

George R. Metcalf 
Joseph G. NeCastro ‘78 

Bruce H. Raimy 
Margaret M. Pietraszek ‘68 

Kathleen C. Rohm 
Ellen H. Ryan ‘64 

William C. Sennett 
Mark J. Salvia ‘82 

Msgr. L. Thomas Snyderwine 
John W. Saxon ‘89 

Jane L. Theuerkauf 
Melanie R. Titzel ’80 

Barrett C. Walker 

P. Kelly Thompkins ‘78 
2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


ADMINISTRATION 248 
ADMINISTRATION 


PRESIDENT’S STAFF 

MICHAEL T. VICTOR, J.D., LL.D. 

President 

DAVID J. DAUSEY, PH.D. 

Provost 
Vice President for Academic Affairs 

DAVID P. MYRON, CPA, C.G.M.A. 

Vice President for Finance and Administration 

MERRY BOLLHEIMER, J.D. 

General Counsel and Vice President for Legal Affairs 

JOSEPH E. HOWARD, M.S. 

Vice President for Enrollment 

ACADEMIC AFFAIRS 

DAVID J. DAUSEY, PH.D. 

Provost 
Vice President for Academic Affairs 

ANDREA BARNETT, M.A. 

Assistant Vice President for Academic 
Affairs 

HEIDI HOSEY, PH.D. 

Dean of Global Programs and 
Experiential Learning 

MICHELE WHEATON, M.S. 

Registrar 

ADMINISTRATIVE 
SERVICES 

ALICE AGNEW 

Title IX Coordinator 

DEBORAH MORTON 

Executive Communications Officer 
Director of Public Relations 

TINA FRYLING, J.D., M.S. 

Deputy Title IX Coordinator 

D.J. FUHRMANN 
Chief of Police/Director of Public Safety 

JAMES TOMETSKO, M.A. 

Director of Human Resources 

ADMINISTRATION 

CALEB PIFER, B.S. 

Vice President for University Advancement 

JEANETTE BRITT, MBA 

Chief Information Officer 

LAURA ZIRKLE, PH.D. 

Vice President for Student Life, Deputy Title IX Coordinator 

SISTER LISA MARY MCCARTNEY, RSM, PH.D. 

Vice President for Mission Integration 

BETSY A. FRANK, B.A. 

Director of Executive Office Projects & Events 

ADMISSIONS AND 
FINANCIAL AID 

JOSEPH E. HOWARD, M.S. 

Vice President of Enrollment 

CHRISTIAN BEYER, B.A. 

Director of Undergraduate Admissions 

ERIC EVANS, B.A. 

Director of International Admissions and 
Services 

CARRIE NEWMAN, M.A. 

Director of Student Financial Services 

ADVANCEMENT 

CALEB PIFER 

Vice President for University 
Advancement 

RYAN PALM 

Associate Vice President for 
Advancement 

SHEILA COON 

Director of External Affairs and 
Government Relations 

LINDSAY FRANK 

Director of Alumni Engagement 

NICHOLAS CIANCI 

Director of Athletic Development 

SUSAN REDDINGER 

Office Manager 

DEBRA TARASOVITCH 

Alumni Relations Coordinator 

ATHLETICS 

JOE KIMBALL, M.ED. 

Director of Athletics 

LAUREN PACKER WEBSTER, M.A. 

Associate Director of Athletics 
Director of Compliance and Senior 
Woman Administrator 

STACEY GAUDETTE 

Head Coach -Women’s Field Hockey, 
Deputy Title IX Coordinator 

JOSH REILLY, B.A. 

Sports Information Director 

BUSINESS SERVICES 

DAVID P. MYRON, CPA, C.G.M.A. 

Vice President for Finance and 
Administration 

JANE STEPHERSON, B.S., CPA 

Assistant Vice President for Finance and 
Treasurer 

DAVID O. HEWETT, B.A., CPA 

Controller 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


ADMINISTRATION 249 
ADMINISTRATION 


LIBRARY 

DARCI JONES, M.S.L.S., ABD 

Director of University Libraries and 
Distance Learning 

EARLEEN GLASER, M.ED., M.S.L.S. 

University Archivist 

PENELOPE WISE, MLS 

Serials/Electronic Resources Librarian 
and Associate Director – Ridge Library 

NATE FRALICK, M.S.L.S. 

Digital Cataloging Librarian 

MISSION INTEGRATION 

SISTER LISA MARY MCCARTNEY, RSM, 
PH.D. 

Vice President for Mission Integration 

GREGORY BAKER, M.A. 

Director of Campus Ministry 

JENELL PATTON, M.A. 

Campus Ministry Outreach Coordinator 

FATHER JAMES PISZKER, M.DIV 

University Chaplain 

COLIN HURLEY, B.A. 

Director of Community Engagement 

BETHANY BRUN, B.A. 

Coordinator of Service Learning 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


FACULTY 250 
FACULTY 


FACULTY 


KRISTINA ALTES 

B.S. Western Washington University 
M.A. University of Florida 
Ph.D. University of Florida 
JUAN J. ARGAEZ 

Associate Professor of Business 

B.A. Universidad del Mayab 
M.A. Edinboro University 
M.A. University of Notre Dame 
Ph.D. University of Notre Dame 
KEYMAN ASEFI 

Instructor of Interior Design 

M.A. Southeast Missouri State University 
B.S. UCSI University, Malaysia 
PAUL ASHCRAFT 

Lecturer of Physics 

B.S. Texas A&M University 
M.S. State University of New York at Albany 
B.S.Ed. Clarion University 
(Candidate) Ph.D. The Pennsylvania State 
University 
GERARD BARRON 

Associate Professor of Psychology 

B.A. Mercyhurst College 
M.A. Edinboro University 
Psy.D. Indiana University of Pennsylvania 
PHILLIP BELFIORE 

Professor of Education 

B.S. Duquesne University 
M.Ed. Kent State University 
Ph.D. Lehigh University 
LEE ANNA BELOVARAC 

Assistant Professor, Walker School of Business 

B.A. Mercyhurst College 
M.B.A. Gannon University 
SARAH L. BENNETT 

Lecturer of Biology 

B.S. Michigan State University 
M.S. Michigan State University 
ANGELA BERARDINELLI 

Assistant Professor of Mathematics 

B.S. Ursinus College 
M.S. University of North Texas 
Ph.D. University of North Texas 
PEGGY BLACK 

Professor Emeritus of Social Work 

B. A. Geneva College 
M.S.S.A. Case Western Reserve University 
Ph.D. University of Pittsburgh 
STEPHANIE BLANDA 

Assistant Professor of Mathematics 

B.S. Lebonon Valley College 
Ph.D. The Pennsylvania State University (ABD) 
MEREDITH BOLLHEIMER 

Associate Professor, Walker School of Business 

B.A. Pennsylvania State University 
J.D. University of Pittsburgh School of Law 
DOUGLAS L. BOUDREAU 

Associate Professor of French 

B.A. Depauw University 
M.A. The Ohio State University 
Ph.D. The Ohio State University 
JAMES G. BRECKENRIDGE 

Professor of Intelligence Studies 

B.A. Virginia Tech 
M.A. University of Virginia 
M.B.A. Gannon University 
Ph.D. Gannon University 
MARY BRECKENRIDGE 

Associate Professor of Business 

B.A. Virginia Tech 
M.S. University of Southern California 
Ed.D. Indiana University of Pennsylvania 
GREGORY BROWN 

Instructor of English 

M.A. University of Mississippi 
Ph.D. University of Mississippi 
RONALD C. BROWN 

Associate Professor of Chemistry 

B.S. Michigan State University 
Ph.D. University of Minnesota 
KATHLEEN T. BUKOWSKI 

Professor Emeritus of Education 

B.A. Mercyhurst College 
M.Ed. Edinboro University 
Ph.D. University of Pittsburgh 
DANIEL V. BURKE 

Professor of Art 

B.A. Mercyhurst College 
M.Ed. Edinboro University 
AMY L. BURNISTON 

Instructor of Biology and Education 

B.S. Pennsylvania State University 
M.S. Mercyhurst University 
JOHN M. CAMPBELL 

Professor of Biology 

B.A. East Stroudsburg State University 
M.S. East Stroudsburg State University 
Ph.D. Texas A&M University 
GARY CARDOT 

Assistant Professor of Art 

B.A. Ohio University 
M.A. University of Massachusetts 
MFA California Institute of the Arts 
ROBERT CHETLIN 

Associate Professor of Sports Medicine 

B.A. Northwestern University 
M.S. West Virginia University 
Ph.D. West Virginia University 
RANDY S. CLEMONS 

Professor of Political Science 

B.A. Whitworth College 
D.A. Idaho State University 
THOMAS G. COOK 

Assistant Professor of Public Health 

B.A. University of Chicago 
MPH Case Western Reserve University 
Ph.D. Case Western Reserve University 
JENNIFER G. CRAVEN 

Lecturer of Fashion Merchandising 

B.S. Mercyhurst College 
M.S. North Carolina State University 
2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


FACULTY 251 
FACULTY 


ROBERT D. CULLEN 

Assistant Professor of Economics 

B.S. John Carroll University 
B.A. John Carroll University 
MBA Gannon University 
AMY DANOWITZ 

Assistant Professor of Chemistry 

B.A. Grinnell College 
M.S. University of Michigan 
Ph.D. University of Michigan 
ORLANDREW E. DANZELL 

Assistant Professor of Intelligence Studies 

B.A. Cameron University 
M.A. Kansas State University 
Ph.D. Kansas State University 
DAVID J. DAUSEY 

Vice President for Academic Affairs 
Provost 
Professor of Public Health 

B.A. Mercyhurst University 
M.Phil. Yale University 
Ph.D. Yale University 
DENNIS C. DIRKMAAT 

Professor of Anthropology 

B.A. University of Pittsburgh 
Ph.D. University of Pittsburgh 
CHRISTOPHER DOLANC 

Assistant Professor of Biology 

B.M. Missouri State University 
B.S. Missouri State University 
M.S. Miami University 
Ph.D. University of California 
THOMAS DONAHUE 

Associate Professor of Philosophy 

B.A. Hofstra University 
Ph.D. SUNY at Buffalo 
AMY DOOLAN 

Associate Professor of Accounting 

B.S. Gannon University 
MBA Gannon University 
DBA Anderson University 
ROBIN DUKE 

Assistant Professor of Physician Assistant Stud

B.S. Slippery Rock University 
M.S. Duquesne University 
AVERILL EARLS 

Visiting Professor of History 

B.A. University of Vermont 
M.A. University of Vermont 
Ph.D. University of Buffalo 
ALICE A. EDWARDS 

Professor of Spanish 

B.A. Gannon University 
M.A. Middlebury College 
Ph.D. University of Pittsburgh 
VERNA EHRET 

Associate Professor of Religious Studies 

B.A. Hamline University 
MAR Yale Divinity School 
Ph.D. University of Iowa 
MICHAEL ELNITSKY 

Associate Professor of Biology 

B.S. Slippery Rock University 
M.S. Miami University 
Ph.D. Miami University 
MICHAEL P. FEDERICI 

Professor of Political Science 

B.S. Elizabethtown College 
M.A. The Catholic University of America 
Ph.D. The Catholic University of America 
MARCIE FITZGERALD 

Assistant Professor of Physician Assistant Stud

B.S. Gannon University 
M.S. University of Nebraska 
ADRIENNE FOOS 

Assistant Professor of Marketing 

B.A. State University of New York at Geneseo 
MBA Rochester Institute of Technology 
Ph.D. University of Manchester, UK 
THOMAS A. FORSTHOEFEL 

Professor of Religious Studies 

B.A. Georgetown University 
M.A. Loyola University of Chicago 
M.A. Ph.D. University of Chicago 
MICHAEL FOULK 

Assistant Professor of Biology 

B.A. Augustana College 
ies (Candidate) Ph.D. Brown University 
TIMOTHY FRAWLEY 

Associate Professor of Elementary/ 
Early Childhood Education 

B.B.A. St. Bonaventure University 
M.Ed. Edinboro University 
D.Ed. Indiana University of Pennsylvania 
SHELLY FREYN 

Assistant Professor of Business 

B.S. Cornell University 
M.A. St. Bonaventure University 
MBA Cleveland State University 
TINA M. FRYLING 

Associate Professor of Criminal Justice 

B.A. Mercyhurst College 
M.S. Mercyhurst College 
J.D. University of Dayton School of Law 
MARIA GARASE 

Associate Professor of Criminal Justice 

B.A. Edinboro University 
M.S. Mercyhurst University 
Ph.D. Indiana University of Pennsylvania 
HEATHER GARVIN 

Assistant Professor of Forensic Science 

B.A. University of Florida 
B.S. University of Florida 
M.S. Mercyhurst University 
Ph.D. Johns Hopkins University 
ies 

LARRY GAURILOFF 

Associate Professor of Biology 

B.A. Oberlin College 
Ph.D. University of Georgia 
DARYL V. GEORGER 

Assistant Professor of Hospitality Management 

B.S. Cornell University 
M.S. University of Massachusetts 
D.Ed. Duquesne University 
ALBERT GLINSKY 

Professor Emeritus of Music 

B.M. Juilliard School of Music 
M.M. Juilliard School of Music 
Ph.D. New York University 
KRISTOFER GOSSETT 

Assistant Professor of Business 

B.S. Otterbein College 
MBA Morehead State University 
DBA Anderson University 
2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


FACULTY 252 
FACULTY 


DAVID GRABELSKI 

Assistant Professor of Intelligence Stud

B.S. Pennsylvania State University 
M.S. Pepperdine University 
ROGER GRIFFITHS 

Associate Professor of Mathematics 

B.S. U.S. Merchant Marine Academy 
B.A. Fort Lewis College 
M.S. Montana State University 
Ph.D. Montana State University 
SUZANNE M. GUSHIE, ATC 

Assistant Professor of Sports Medicine 

B.S. Mercyhurst College 
M.A. Western Michigan University 
FRANK E. HAGAN 

Professor Emeritus of Sociology 

B.A. Gannon University 
M.A. University of Maryland 
Ph.D. Case Western Reserve University 
PENNY A. HANES, CPA 

Associate Professor of Accounting 

B.S. Gannon University 
MBA Gannon University 
TIMOTHY HARVEY 

Assistant Professor of Sports Medicine 

B.S. Central Connecticut State College 
M.S. Canisius College 
MELISSA HEERBOTH 

Associate Professor of Psychology 

B.A. Saint Anselm College 
M.A. University of New Hampshire 
M.T. University of New Hampshire 
Ph.D. University of New Hampshire 
NATHAN HESS 

Assistant Professor of Music 

B.M. James Madison University 
M.M. University of Cincinnati 
DMA University of Cincinnati 
ROBERT A. HOFF 

Professor of Psychology 

B.A. Wagner College 
M.A. University of Minnesota 
HEIDI K. HOSEY 

ies Professor of English 

B.A. Villa Maria College 
M.A. Gannon University 
Ph.D. Indiana University of Pennsylvania 
RANDALL S. HOWARTH 

Professor of History 

B.A. University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth 
M.A. University of Illinois, Champaign-Urbana 
Ph.D. University of Illinois, Champaign-Urbana 
SARAH HOWORTH 

Assistant Professor of Education 

B.A. Hobart and William Smith College 
M.Ed. University of Phoenix 
Ph.D. State University of New York Buffalo 
THOMAS P. HUBERT 

Professor of Art 

B.A. Mercyhurst College 
MFA Rochester Institute of Technology 
TAUNA HUNTER 

Professor of Dance 
BFA University of Utah 
MFA University of Utah 

DAVID HYLAND 

Biology/Anthropology/Archaeology 

B.A. University of Cincinnati 
Ph.D. University of Pittsburgh 
BRADLEY R. JACOBSON, A.T.C. 

Assistant Professor of Sports Medicine 

B.A. Alfred University 
M.A. University of North Carolina 
WILLIAM JEFFRESS 

Instructor of Sport Business 

B.S. University of New Haven 
M.S. University of New Haven 
M.S. Gannon University 
(Candidate) Ph.D. Gannon University 
HOLLY JODON 

Associate Professor of Physician Studies 

B.S. Gannon University 
M.P.A.S. University of Nebraska 
BRETT JOHNSON 

Assistant Professor of English 

B.A. Susquehanna University 
M.A. University of Missouri-Columbia 
Ph.D. University of Missouri-Columbia 
JOSEPH A. JOHNSON 

Assistant Professor of Physics 

B.S. Edinboro University 
M.Ed. Gannon University 
Ph.D. State University of New York at Buffalo 
RYAN JOHNSON 

Instructor of Hospitality Management 

B.A. Mercyhurst University 
M.S.M.L. Western Governors University 
SUSAN D. JOHNSON 

Assistant Professor of Education 

B.S. SUNY at Fredonia 
M.S. Saint Bonaventure University 
Ph.D. Gannon University (ABD) 
EDWARD A. JOLIE 

Assistant Professor of Anthropology/ 
Archaeology 

B.A. Mercyhurst College 
M.A. University of Nevada, Reno 
M.S. University of New Mexico 
RUTH BURGETT JOLIE 

Assistant Professor in Anthropology/ 
Archaeology 

B.A. Mercyhurst College 
M.A. University of Nevada, Reno 
Ph.D. University of New Mexico 
LOUISA JONASON 

Assistant Professor of Music 

B.A. Moorhead State University 
M.M. Brooklyn College, City University 
of New York 
CLINTON JONES 

Associate Professor of Chemistry 

B.S. Georgia Institute of Technology 
Ph.D. Georgia Institute of Technology 
DYAN JONES 

Associate Professor of Physics 

B.A. Edinboro University 
M.S. Miami University, Oxford, Ohio 
Ph.D. Kansas State University 
2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


FACULTY 253 
FACULTY 


PATRICK KELLY 

Assistant Professor of Mathematics 

B.S. Gannon University 
M.A. University of Pittsburgh 
KATIE M. KILMER 

Instructor of Biology 

B.S. University of Pittsburgh 
B.S. Mercyhurst University 
M.S. Mercyhurst University 
EMMALEIGH KIRCHNER 

Instructor of Criminal Justice 

B.S. University of Louisville 
M.A. University of Louisville 
Ph.D. Indiana University of Pennsylvania 
CANDICE KISKADDEN 

Instructor of Nursing 
BSN The Pennsylvania State University 
MSN Edinboro University 

THOMAS P. KITCHEN, BCBA 

Assistant Professor of Education 

B.A. Mercyhurst College 
M.S. Mercyhurst College 
SPYRIDON KODELLAS 

Assistant Professor of Criminal Justice 

B.A. National & Kapodistrian University of Athens 
M.A. National & Kapodistrian University of Athens 
Ph.D. University of Cincinnati 
MICHAEL LAMM 

Assistant Professor of Intelligence Studies 

B.A. Mercyhurst University 
Doctoral Candidate at the University of North Korean 
Studies 
NICHOLAS LANG 

Associate Professor of Geology 

B.A. Whitman College 
M.S. Vanderbilt University 
Ph.D. University of Minnesota 
LAURA LEWIS 

Professor of Social Work 

B.A. Whitworth College 
M.A. Idaho State University 
MSW University of Pittsburgh 
Ph.D. University of Pittsburgh 
MARILYN LIVOSKY 

Professor of Psychology 

A.B. Youngstown State University 
M.S. Colorado State University 
Ph.D. Colorado State University 
JAMES B. LOHREY 

Assistant Professor of Communication 

B.A. SUNY at Buffalo 
M.A. SUNY at Buffalo 
CHRIS J. MAGOC 

Professor of History 

B.A. Edinboro University 
M.A. Pennsylvania State University at 
Middletown 
Ph.D. University of New Mexico 
RICHARD McCARTY 

Associate Professor of Religious Studies 

B.A. Iowa State University 
M.Div. Western Theological Seminary 
Ph.D. The University of Iowa 
SARAH McCOOL 

Instructor of Public Health 

B.S. University of Iowa 
M.S. Des Moines University 
Ph.D. Arizona State University 
DANIEL McFEE 

Professor of Religious Studies 

B.A. Bowling Green State University 
M.Div. Duke University 
Ph.D. Marquette University 
JOANNE M. McGURK 

Assistant Professor of English 

B.A. Chestnut Hill College 
M.A. Western Illinois University 
Ph.D. Indiana University of Pennsylvania 
SCOTT McKENZIE 

Assistant Professor of Geology 

B.S. Edinboro University of Pennsylvania 
SCOTT MEIER 

Associate Professor of Music 

B.A. University of Wyoming 
M.M. University of Redlands 
Ph.D. Florida State University 
SCOTT MICHEL 

Instructor of Athletic Training 

B.S. Mercyhurst University 
M.A. Western Michigan University 
(Candidate) Ph.D. Western Michigan University 
ARTHUR MILLS 

Assistant Professor of Intelligence Studies 

B.A. Gannon University 
M.A. Vanderbilt University 
KAREN MORAHAN 

Assistant Professor of Nursing 

B.S. Dominican College 
M.S. University of Maryland at Baltimore 
Ph.D. Capella University 
JOSEPH MORRIS 

Associate Professor of Political Science 

B.A. San Diego State University 
M.A. California State University 
MPA Idaho State University 
D.A. Idaho State University 
JONATHAN MOSER 

Visiting Instructor of Music 

B.M. Shenandoah University 
M.M. Arizona State University 
JANELLE NEWMAN 

Instructor of Intensive English 

B.S. Gannon University 
M.A. University of Southern Queensland 
Ph.D. Indiana University of Pennsylvania (ABD) 
JOHN OLSZOWKA 

Associate Professor of History 

B.A. SUNY at Buffalo 
M.A. SUNY at Buffalo 
Ph.D. SUNY at Binghamton 
STEPHEN OUSLEY 

Associate Professor of Anthropology/ 
Archaeology/Forensic Science 

B.A. University of Maryland 
M.A. University of Tennessee 
Ph.D. University of Tennessee 
MARY ANN OWOC 

Associate Professor of Archaeology 

B.A. University of Pittsburgh 
Ph.D. University of Sheffield, England 
2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


FACULTY 254 
FACULTY 


BORA PAJO 

Assistant Professor of Social Work 
B.A./M.A. Fakuleti i Drejtesise 
Universiteti i Tiranes 

M.A. St. John’s University 
Ph.D. Florida International University 
AMY D. PARENTE 

Associate Professor of Chemistry / Biochemistry 

B.S. State University of New York 
M.S. University of Rochester 
Ph.D. University of Rochester 
JOHN PARENTE 

Assistant Professor of Sport Business 

B.S. State University College at Fredonia 
M.S. State University College at Buffalo 
D.Ed. Pennsylvania State University 
NOELLE PARTUSCH 

Associate Professor of Dance 
BFA SUNY at Purchase 
MFA Ohio State University 

DONALD M. PLATTE 

Professor of Mathematics 

B.A. Aquinas College 
M.A. Michigan State University 
Ph.D. Michigan State University 
CHARLES REDMOND 

Professor of Mathematics 

B.A. Temple University 
Ph.D. Lehigh University 
BRIAN REED 

Professor of English 

B.A. Wittenberg University 
M.A. Youngstown State University 
Ph.D. Case Western Reserve University 
CHRISTINA RIEGER 

Associate Professor of English 

B.A. University of Dallas 
Ph.D. Notre Dame University 
CHRISTINA RILEY-BROWN 

Associate Professor of English 

B.A. University of Arkansas 
M.A. University of Mississippi 
Ph.D. University of Mississippi 
BRIAN D. RIPLEY 

Professor of Political Science 

B.A. Macalester College 
Ph.D. Ohio State University 
LEANNE M. ROBERTS 

Professor of Education 

B.S. Edinboro University 
M.Ed. Edinboro University 
Ph.D. Akron University 
JEFFREY ROESSNER 

Professor of English 

B.A. Mercyhurst College 
MFA University of Notre Dame 
Ph.D. University of Notre Dame 
ASHLEE RZYCZYCKI 

Instructor of Fashion Merchandising 

B.A. Mercyhurst University 
M.A. The University of Akron 
MARK SANTILLANO 

Assistant Professor of Dance 

B.S. Southwest Missouri State University 
BFA Southwest Missouri State University 
M.A. Wesleyan University 
SOLVEIG SANTILLANO 

Associate Professor of Dance 

B.A. Juilliard School of Dance 
M.A. Wesleyan University of Connecticut 
BENJAMIN SCHARFF 

Assistant Professor of History 

B.A. Wake Forest University 
M.A. Slippery Rock University 
Ph.D. West Virginia University 
ALLYSON SCHRIMPER-MINOR 

Instructor of Hotel Management 

B.A. Mercyhurst University 
M.S. Mercyhurst University 
BRIAN SHERIDAN 

Lecturer of Communication 

B.A. Mercyhurst College 
M.A. Edinboro University 
JAMES SNYDER 

Associate Professor of Philosophy 

B.A. Slippery Rock University 
B.S. Slippery Rock University 
M.A. Duquesne University 
Ph.D. Duquesne University 
MARY HEMBROW SNYDER 

Professor of Religious Studies 

B.A. Canisius College 
M.A. Marquette University 
Ph.D. St. Michael’s College, Toronto 
PETER STADTMUELLER 

Lecturer of Art 

B.S. California University of Pennsylvania 
M.S. University of Pittsburgh 
JODI STANIUNAS-HOPPER 

Associate Professor of Graphic Design 

B.A. Mercyhurst College 
MFA Marywood University 
JUDITH STANLEY 

Assistant Professor of Nursing 

B. A. SUNY at Buffalo 
MSN D’Youville College 
D.H.D. Nova Southwestern University 
CRAIG STEVENS 

Instructor of Music Therapy 

B.A. University of Dayton 
M.A. Naropa University 
KEVIN SULLIVAN 

Associate Professor of Philosophy 

B.A. Gannon University 
M.A. University of Dayton 
Ph.D. Marquette University 
MARNIE SULLIVAN 

Assistant Professor of English 

B.A. University of Pittsburgh 
M.A. Clarion University 
Ph.D. Bowling Green State University 
CHRISTOPHER TAYLOR 

Assistant Professor of Chemistry 

B.S. Evergreen State College 
M.S. University of Michigan 
Ph.D. University of Michigan 
2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


FACULTY 255 
FACULTY 


GERARD TOBIN 

Associate Professor of Psychology 
Ph.D. Loyola University Chicago 

A.B. College of the Holy Cross 
M.A. Loyola University Chicago 
SARA TURNER 

Assistant Professor of Biology 

B.A. Pomona College 
Ph.D. Purdue University 
MUSA TUZUNER 

Visiting Instructor of Intelligence Studies 

B.A. Turkish National Police Academy 
B.B.A. Gazi University 
M.A. Kent State University 
Ph.D. Kent State University 
ROBERT VON THADEN 

Associate Professor of Religious Studies 

B.A. Muhlenberg College 
M.A. University of Chicago Divinity School 
Ph.D. Emory University 
LUYANG WANG 

Visiting Instructor of Chinese 

B.A. Guangdong University of Foreign Studies 
M.A. Purdue University 
Ph.D. Purdue University 
JACLYN WATTERSON 

Assistant Professor of English 

B.S. Southern Connecticut State University 
M.F.A. Oregon State University 
Ph.D. University of Utah 
MATTHEW WEAVER 

Assistant Professor of Psychology 

B.S. Allegheny College 
Ph.D. University of Florida 
AMY WEAVER-KAULIS 

Assistant Professor of Fashion Merchandising 

B.S. Mercyhurst College 
M.S. University of North Texas 
KATHY WEIDENBOERNER 

Assistant Professor of Interior Design 

B.A. Mercyhurst College 
M.Ed. Gannon University 
WILLIAM WELCH 

Instructor of Intelligence Studies 

B.A. Point Park College 
M.S. Mercyhurst University 
KRISTAN WHEATON 

Associate Professor of Intelligence Studies 

B.B.A. University of Notre Dame 
M.A. Florida State University 
J.D. University of South Carolina 
JACK D. WILLIAMS 

Professor of Chemistry 

B.A. Pennsylvania State University 
Ph.D. Villanova University 
KAREN WILLIAMS 

Professor of Spanish 

B.M. Iowa State University 
M.A. University of Georgia 
Ph.D. University of Georgia 
LAUREN WILLIAMS 

Assistant Professor of Mathematics 

B.A. College of New Jersey 
M.A. University of Wisconsin Milwaukee 
Ph.D. University of Wisconsin Milwaukee 
DAWN M. WOZNEAK 

Assistant Professor of Intelligence Studies 

B.A. SUNY at Fredonia 
M.S. Mercyhurst University 
Ph.D. Capella University 
SELIN YALCINDAG 

Assistant Professor of Economics 

B.A. Bosphorus University 
M.A. Boston College 
Ph.D. Boston College 
KIM ZACHERL 

Assistant Professor of Business 

B.A. Mercyhurst College 
MBA Gannon University 
SPHR, SHRM-SCP Certifications 
ANNE ZAPHIRIS 

Associate Professor of Communication 

B.A. Edinboro University 
M.A. Kent State University 
Ph.D. SUNY at Buffalo 
PART-TIME FACULTY 

CARL ANDERSON 

B.S. Indiana University of Pennsylvania 
MBA Penn State University 
RAYMOND BUYCE 

Professor of Geology 

B.S. Union College 
M.S. Brown University 
Ph.D. Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute 
SUMMER EKELUND 

B.S. Gannon University 
M.A. DePaul University 
MANDY FAUBLE 

B.A. Thomas Aquinas College 
M.A. Edinboro University of Pennsylvania 
Ph.D. Case Western University 
ROBERT GREEN 

B.S. Pennsylvania State University 
ERIN MAGORIEN 

B.S. Mercyhurst College 
M.S. Mercyhurst College 
MARK SIMPSON 

B.A. Mercyhurst College 
M.S. Taxation Washington School of Law 
M.S. Penn State Behrend College 
BECKY WUNCH 

B.A. Duquesne University 
M.M. Bowling Green State University 
CONCURRENT FACULTY 

LINDA BREMMER 

Lecturer in English 

B.A. University of Pittsburgh 
M.Ed. University of Pittsburgh 
ALLISON BYRNES 

Lecturer in Anthropology/Archaeology 

B.S. Mercyhurst University 
M.A. University of Wyoming 
LUIS CABO-PEREZ 

Lecturer in Anthropology/Archaeology 

B.S. Universidad de Oviedo 
M.S. Universidad de Oviedo 
ALLEN QUINN 

Lecturer in Anthropology/Archaeology 

B.A. Hobart College 
Ph.D. University of Pittsburgh 
REBECCA RYAN 

Lecturer in Choral Music 

B.A. Mt. Holyoke College 
2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


256 


CONFERENCE FOR MERCY HIGHER EDUCATION 

CARLOW UNIVERSITY 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 

COLLEGE OF SAINT MARY 
Omaha, NE 68124 

GEORGIAN COURT UNIVERSITY 
Lakewood, NJ 08701 

GWYNEDD-MERCY UNIVERSITY 
Gwynedd Valley, PA 19437 

MARIA COLLEGE 
Albany, NY 12208 

MERCY COLLEGE OF HEALTH SCIENCES 
Des Moines, IA 50309 

MERCYHURST UNIVERSITY 
Erie, PA 16546 

MISERICORDIA UNIVERSITY 
Dallas, PA 18612 

MOUNT ALOYSUIS COLLEGE 
Cresson, PA 16630 

MOUNT MERCY COLLEGE 
Cedar Rapids, IA 52402 

SAINT JOSEPH’S COLLEGE 
Standish, ME 04602 

SAINT XAVIER UNIVERSITY 
Chicago, IL 60655 

SALVE REGINA UNIVERSITY 
Newport, RI 02840 

TROCAIRE COLLEGE 
Buffalo, NY 14220 

UNIVERSITY OF DETROIT MERCY 
Detroit, MI 48219 

UNIVERSITY OF SAINT JOSEPH 
West Hartford, CT 06117 

Mercy Cross, Hammermill Library Lobby 
Photograph by Gary Cardot 


INDEX A 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


257 


INDEX 
A 

Academic Calendar 2 
Academic Forgiveness 15 
Academic Honesty 18 
Academic Policies 15 
Academic Probation & Suspension 14 
Academic Progress 14 
Academic Programs 2 
Academic Services 21 
Accelerated MBA Program 24 
Accelerated Program in Medicine 23 
Accelerated Program in Pharmacy 23 
Acceptance of Credits for Online Courses 27 
Acceptance of Credits from Other Institutions 27 
Accounting Major 60 
Administration 248 
Admissions 26 
Adult Programs 29 
Advanced Placement 20 
Anthropology -Archaeology 43 
Applications, Financial Aid, Summer 35 
Applied Forensic Sciences 46 
Arab and Islamic Studies 155 
Archaeology -Anthropology 43 
Art Majors 49 
Astronomy, Physics 130 
Asian Studies 155 
Associate Degrees 11 
Athletic Eligibility 8 
Athletic Training Major 52 
Athletics 7 
Attendance Policy 17 
Audit 17 
Autism Initiative at Mercyhurst 21 
Award of Credit for Nontraditional Learning 28 

B 
Basic Competencies Requirements 16 
Biochemistry Major 68 
Biology Majors 55 
Business Majors 59 

C 
Campus and Buildings 4 
Campus Involvement Center 6 
Campus Ministry 6 
Campus Visits 26 
Career Development Center 7 
Carpe Diem Award 15 
Catholic Studies Program 65 
Center for English Language Studies 66 
Chemistry Majors 68 
Classification -Enrollment Status 37 
Cohen Student Health Center 10 

College Level Examination Program 20 
Communication Majors 72 
Company Reimbursement 29 
Computer Facilities 5 
Conduct Code 9 
Contract Major/Minor 13 
Core Curriculum Rationale 11 
Counseling Center 8 
Course Examination 17 
Course Overloads 18 
Course Withdrawal 17, 35 
Criminal Justice Major 75 

D 

Dance 79 
Deadlines -FAFSA Filing 32 
Deadlines -Financial Aid Requested Information 
32 
Deadlines -SAP Appeal 35 
Dean’s List and Honors 15 
Degree Completion Time Frames 11 
Double Majors/Minors 12 

E 

Economics 60 
Education Majors 82 
Eligibility Criteria -Financial Aid 35-37 
English Majors 87 
Enrollment -Status Classification 37 
Evelyn L. Institute for Ethics and Society 25 
Examination Credit 20 
Exercise Science 95 

F 

Faculty 250 
Faculty Led Study Abroad 24 
FAFSA 29 
FAFSA -Deadline for Filing 29 
Fashion Merchandising 98 
Federal and State Grants 29 
Federal Perkins Loan 40 
Federal SEOG 39 
Federal (Title IV) Financial Aid Refund Policy Due 
to total Withdrawal (Cease Enrollment) 33 
Federal Work-Study (FWS) 40 
Fees 32 
Finance Major 61 
Financial Aid -Special Circumstances 36 
Financial Aid 32 
Financial Aid Application 
Procedures and Deadlines 35 
Financial Aid Package 36 
Financial Aid Policies 38 
Forensic Science 46 
Free Application for Federal Student 

Aid (FAFSA) 29 
French Studies 154 
Full-Time Student Status 20 

G 

Gender Studies 100 
Geology 101 
Grade Appeals 18 
Grade Point Average 14 
Grading System 14 
Graduation Requirements 12 
Graduation with Latin Honors 15 
Graduation Awards 15 
Grants -Pell/SEOG 39 
Graphic Design 50 

H 

Hafenmaier College of Humanities, Arts and Social 
Sciences 11 
History Major 104 
Honors Program 22 
Hospitality Management Programs 109 

I 

Incomplete Grades 18 
Independent Study 19 
Institutional and State Grant/Scholarship Financial 
Aid Refund Policy Due to Total Withdrawal (Cease 
Enrollment) 33 
Institutional Review Board 19 
Institutional Employment 40 
Intelligence Studies 113 
Interior Architecture & Design 116 
International Business Major 62 
International Students 27 
Internships 23 
Intramural Sports 8 

L 

Lake Erie College of Osteopathic Medicine 58 
Language Laboratory 4 
Learning Differences Programs 21 
Library Services 25 

M 

Management Major 62 
Marketing Major 63 
Mathematics and Information Technology 119 
Mathematics Competency 16 
Mercyhurst North East 26 
Military Science 121 
Minor Program 13 
Music Programs 123 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


258 


N 

National Collegiate Athletic Association 7 
National Honor Societies 16 
Need-Based Grants 39 
Notification of Admission Decision 26 

O 

Off-Campus Learning Experience 22 
Off-Campus Living 9 
Official Communication 3 

P 

Packaging, Financial Aid 36 
Parking 10 
Part-Time Student Status 20 
Pass-Fail Option 14 
Pell Grant 29 
PHEAA 29 
Philosophy Major 128 
Physics Major 130 
Police and Safety Services 10 
Political Science Major 133 
Post-Baccalaureate Programs 28 
Pre-Law 78, 89, 134 
Professional School Preparation 24 
Proficiency Exams 20 
Psychology Major 138 
Public Health 140 

R 

Registration 17 

Religious Studies 143 

Repeated Courses 14 

Required Fee 31 

Required Fee Schedule per Semester 31 

Residence Life 8 

Ridge College of Intelligence Studies 
and Applied Sciences 11 
Russian Studies 154 

S 
Satisfactory Academic Progress (SAP) 14, 41 
Schedule Changes 17 
Scholarships -Undergraduate, Merit-Based 34 
Second Degree 27 
Security Violations and Misuse 19 
Selective Service 37 
Sociology/Social Work 145 
Spanish Studies 154 
Special Programs 29 
Special Requirements 26 
Special Students 21 
Sport Business Management Major 63 
Sports Medicine 148 
Status, Enrollment 37 
Student Employment Work-Study (IWS) 40 
Student Grievance Procedure 18 
Student Loans 40 
Student Life 6 
Study Abroad 24 
Summer -Financial Aid Application 36 
Summer Sessions 11 
Sustainability Studies 152 

T 

Taking a Course off Campus 17 
The University Mission Statement 4 
The D’Angelo Department of Music 123 
The International Baccalaureate Program 20 
Tom Ridge College of Intelligence Studies 

and Applied Sciences 11 
Transfer Policy 26 
Trustees 247 
Tuition and Fees 31 
Tutorial Study 19 

U 

Undergraduate Grants 32-33 
Undergraduate Scholarships 32-33 

V 

Verification 37 
Veteran’s Resources 30 

W 

Walker College of Business 11 
Withdrawal Policy 33, 35 
Work-Study 40 
World Languages and Cultures 153 

Z 

Zurn College of Natural and Health Sciences 11 

2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


2016-2017 Mercyhurst University Course Catalog • 
mercyhurst.edu 


